Trust to the next slab turned his head with difficulty. "'Where is it at the moment, precisely?' he said. Daquim squinted down across the swamps and the forest roof. "'Well, it's a first-class view from up here to begin with.' "'Oh, good,' said Rincewind. "'You know, I never would have looked at it like that. You're absolutely right. It's the kind of view you'll remember for the rest of your life, I expect. I mean, it's not as if it'll be any great feat of recollection.' "'There's no need to be sarcastic. I was only passing a remark.' "'I want my mum,' said Eric from the middle slab. "'Chin up, lad,' said Daquim. 'At least you're being sacrificed for something worthwhile. I just suggested they tried using the wheels upright so they'd roll. I'm afraid they're not very responsive to new ideas round here. Still, nil desperandum, where there's life there's hope.' Rincewind growled. "'If there was one thing he couldn't stand, it was people who were fearless in the face of death. It seemed to strike at something absolutely fundamental in him. "'In fact,' said Daquim, "'I think—' He rolled from side to side experimentally, tugging at the vines which were holding him down. "'Yes, I think that when they did these ropes up—' "'Yes, definitely, they—' "'What, what?' said Rincewind. "'Yes, definitely,' said Daquim. "'I'm absolutely sure about it. They did them up very tightly and professionally, not an inch of give in them anywhere.' "'Thank you,' said Rincewind." The flat top of the truncated pyramid was in fact quite large, with plenty of room for statues, priests, slabs, gutters, knife-chipping production lines, and all the other things the Tessiman needed for the bulk disposal of religion. In front of Rincewind several priests were busy chanting a long list of complaints about swamps, mosquitoes, lack of metal ore, volcanoes, the weather, the way obsidian never kept its edge, the trouble with having a god like Quezobacoatl, the way wheels never worked properly however often you laid them flat and pushed them, and so on. The prayers of most religions generally praise and thank the gods involved, either out of general piety, or in the hope that he or she will take the hint and start acting responsibly. The Tessiman, having taken a long hard look around their world, and decided bluntly that things were just about as bad as they were ever going to get, had perfected the art of plainchant whinge. "'Won't be long now,' said the parrot, from its perch atop a statue of one of the Tessiman's lesser gods. It had got there by a complicated sequence of events that had involved a lot of squawking, a cloud of feathers, and three Tessiman priests with badly swollen thumbs. "'The high priest is just performing a wasp-name in honour of Quezobacoatl,' it went on conversationally. "'You've drawn quite a crowd.' "'I suppose you wouldn't kind of hop down here and bite through these ropes, would you?' said Rincewind. "'Not a chance.' Thought so. "'Sun's coming up soon,' the parrot continued. Rincewind felt that it sounded unnecessarily cheerful. "'I'm going to complain about this, demon,' moaned Eric. "'You wait till my mother finds out. My parents have got influence, you know.' "'Oh, good,' said Rincewind weakly. "'Why don't you tell the high priest that if he cuts your heart out, she'll be right down to the school tomorrow to complain?' The Tessiman priests bowed towards the sun, and all eyes in the crowd below turned to the jungle. Where something was happening there was a sound of crackling undergrowth. Tropical birds erupted through the trees, shrieking. Rincewind, of course, could not see this. "'You never should have wanted to be ruler of the world,' he said. "'I mean, what did you expect? You can't expect people to be happy about seeing you. No one ever is when the landlord turns up.' "'But they're going to kill me.' "'It's just their way of saying that, metaphorically. They're fed up with waiting for you to repaint the place and see to the drains.' The whole jungle was in uproar now. Animals exploded out of the bushes as if running from a fire. A few heavy thumps indicated that trees were falling over. At last a frantic jaguar crashed through the undergrowth and loped down the causeway. The luggage was a few feet behind it. It was covered with creepers, leaves, and the feathers of various rare jungle fowls, some of which were now even rarer. The jaguar could have avoided it by zigging or zagging to either side, but sheer idiot's terror prevented it. It made the mistake of turning its head to see what was behind it. This was the last mistake it ever made. "'You know that box of yours?' said the parrot. "'What about it?' said Rincewind. "'It's headed this way.' The priests peered down at the running figure far below. The luggage had a straightforward way of dealing with things between it and its intended destination. It ignored them. It was at this moment, against all his instincts, in great trepidation and, most unfortunately of all, in deep ignorance of what was happening, that Quez Overcoatl himself chose to materialize on top of the pyramid. Several of the priests noticed him. The knives fell from their fingers. "'Eh!' squeaked the demon. Other priests turned around. "'Right! Now I want you all to pay attention!' squeaked Quez Overcoatl, cupping its tiny hands around its main mouth in an effort to be heard. This was very embarrassing. He'd enjoyed being the Tessiman god. He'd been really impressed by their single-minded devotion to duty. He'd been very gratified by the incredible lifelike statue in the pyramid, and it really hurt to have to reveal that, in one important particular, it was incorrect. He was six inches high. "'Now then!' he began. "'This is very important!' Unfortunately, no one ever found out why. At that moment, the luggage breasted the top of the pyramid, its legs whirring like propellers, and landed squarely on the slabs. There was a brief, flat squeak. "'It was a funny old world,' said the Quirm. "'You had to laugh, really. If you didn't, you'd go mad, wouldn't you? One minute strapped to a slab and about to undergo exquisite torture, the next being given a breakfast, a change of clothes, a hot tub, and a free lift out of the kingdom. It made you believe there was a god. Of course, the Tessiman knew there was a god, and that he was currently a small and distressing greasy patch on top of the pyramid, which left them with a bit of a problem. The luggage squatted in the city's main plaza. The entire priesthood was sitting around it and watching it carefully, in case it did anything amusing or religious. "'Are you going to leave it behind?' said Eric. "'It's not as simple as that,' said Rincewind. "'It generally catches up. Let's just go away quickly. But we'll take the tribute, won't we?' "'I think that could be an amazingly bad idea,' said Rincewind. "'Let's just quietly go while they're in a good temper. The novelty will wear off soon, I expect.' "'And I've got to get on with my search for the Fountain of Youth,' said de Quombe. "'Oh, yes,' said Rincewind. "'I've devoted my whole life to it, you know,' said the old man proudly. Rincewind looked him up and down. "'Really?' he said. "'Oh, yes, exclusively, ever since I was a boy.' Rincewind's expression was one of acute puzzlement. "'In that case,' he began, in the manner of one talking to a child, "'wouldn't it have been better, you know, more sensible, if you'd just got on with—' "'What?' said de Quombe. "'Oh, never mind,' said Rincewind. "'I'll tell you what, though,' he added. "'I think, in order to prevent you getting, you know, bored, we should present you with this wonderful talking parrot.' He made a swift grab, while keeping his thumbs firmly out of harm's way. "'It's a jungle fowl,' he said. "'Cruel to subject it to city life, isn't it?' "'I was born in a cage, you raving wassname!' screamed the parrot. Rincewind faced it, nose to beak. "'It's that, or fricassee time,' he said. The parrot opened its beak to bite his nose, saw his expression, and thought better of it. "'Polly want a biscuit,' it managed, adding sotto voce. "'Wassname, wassname, wassname, wassname!' "'A dear little bird of my very own,' said de Quombe. "'I shall look after it. Wassname, wassname, wassname!' They reached the jungle. A few minutes later the luggage trotted after them. It was noon in the kingdom of Tesua. From inside the main pyramid came the sounds of a very large statue being dismantled. The priests sat around thoughtfully. Occasionally one of them stood up and made a short speech. It was clear that points were being made. For example, how the economics of the kingdom depended on a buoyant obsidian knife industry, how the enslaved neighbouring kingdoms had come to rely on the smack of firm government, and incidentally on the hack, slash, and disembowelling of firm government as well, and on the terrible fate that awaited any people who didn't have gods. Godless people might get up to anything. They might turn against the fine old traditions of thrift and non-self-sacrifice that had made the kingdom what it was today. They might start wondering why, if they didn't have a god, they need all those priests. Anything. The point was well put by Mazuma, the head priest, when he said, "'Squashed figure with broken nose, jaguar claw, three feathers, stylized spiny anteater.' After a while, a vote was taken. By nightfall, the kingdom's leading stonemasons were at work on a new statue. It was basically oblong, with lots of legs." The Demon King drummed his fingers on his desk. It wasn't that he was unhappy about the fate of Quez Overcoatl, who would now have to spend several centuries in one of the Nether Hells while he grew a new corporeal body. Serve him right, the ghastly little imp. Nor was it the broad trend of events on the pyramid. After all, the whole point of the wish business was to see to it that what the client got was exactly what he asked for, and exactly what he didn't really want. It was just that he didn't feel in control of things, which was, of course, ridiculous. If the best came to the best, he could always materialize and sort things out personally. But he liked people to believe that all the bad things happening to them were just fate and destiny. It was one of the few things that cheered him up. He turned back to the mirror. After a while, he had to adjust the temporal control. One minute, the breathless, humid jungles of Clatch, the next, I thought we were going to go back to my room, Eric complained. I thought that too, said Rincewind, shouting to be heard over the rumbling. Snap your fingers again, demon! Not on your life! There's plenty of places worse than this. But it's all hot and dark. Rincewind had to concede that. It was also shaking and noisy. When his eyes grew used to the blackness, he could make out a few spots of light here and there, whose dim radiance suggested that they were inside something like a boat. There was a definite feel of carpentry about everything, and a powerful smell of wood shavings and glue. If it was a boat, then it was having an awfully painful launching down a slipway greased with rocks. A jolt slung him heavily against a bulkhead. I must say, complained Eric, if this is where the most beautiful woman in the world lives, I don't think much of her choice of boudoir. You'd think she'd put a few cushions or something around the place. Boudoir? said Rincewind. She's bound to have one, said Eric smugly. I've read about them. She reclines on it. Tell me, said Rincewind, have you ever felt the need to have a cold bath and a brisk run around the playing fields? Never. It could be worth a try. The rumbling stopped abruptly. There was a distant clanging noise, such as might be made by a pair of great big gates being shut. Rincewind thought he heard some voices fading into the distance, and a chuckle. It wasn't a particularly pleasant chuckle. It was more of a snigger, and it boded no good for someone. Rincewind had a pretty good idea who. He'd stopped wondering how he'd come to be here, wherever it was. Malign forces, that was probably it. At least nothing particularly dreadful was happening to him right now. Probably it was only a matter of time. He groped around a bit until his fingers encountered what turned out to be, following an inspection by the light of the nearest knot-hole, a rope ladder. Further probing at one end of the hull, or whatever it was, brought him in contact with a small round hatchway. It was bolted on the inside. He crawled back to Eric. There's a door, he whispered. Where does it go? It stays where it is, I think, said Rincewind. Find out where it leads, Toademon. Could be a bad idea, said Rincewind cautiously. Get on with it. Rincewind crawled gloomily to the hatch and grasped the bolt. The hatch creaked open. Down below, quite a long way below, there were damp cobblestones, across which a breeze was driving a few shreds of morning mist. With a little sigh, Rincewind unrolled a ladder. Two minutes later they were standing in the gloom of what appeared to be a large plaza. A few buildings showed through the mist. Where are we? said Eric. Search me. You don't know? Not a clue, said Rincewind. Eric glared at the mist-shrouded architecture. Fat chance of finding the most beautiful woman in the world in a dump like this, he said. It occurred to Rincewind to see what they had just climbed out of. He looked up. Above them, a long way above them, and supported on four massive legs, which ran down to a huge wheeled platform, there was undoubtedly a huge wooden horse. More correctly, the rear of a huge wooden horse. The builder could have put the exit hatch in a more dignified place, but for humorous reasons of his own, had apparently decided not to. Erm, said Rincewind. Someone coughed. He looked down. The evaporating mists now revealed a broad circle of armed men, many of them grinning, and all of them carrying mass-produced soulless, but above all sharp, long spears. Ah, said Rincewind. He looked back up at the hatchway. It said it all, really. The only thing I don't understand, said the sergeant to the guard, is why two of you? We were expecting maybe a hundred. He leaned back on his stool, his great plumed helmet in his lap, a pleased smile on his face. Honestly, you are Phoebeans, he said. Talk about laugh. You must think we was born yesterday. All night, nothing but sawing and hammering. The next thing, there's a damn great wooden horse outside the gates, so I think, that's funny, a bloody great wooden horse with air holes. That's the kind of little detail I notice, see, air holes. So I must draw the lads, and we nips out extra early, and drag it in the gates, as per expectations, and then we bides quiet-like around it, waiting to see what it coughs up, in a manner of speaking. Nah, he pushed his unshaven face close to Rincewind. You've got a choice, see. Top seat or bottom seat, it's up to you. I just have to put the word in. You play discus with me, and I'll play discus with you. Ball games were unknown in the disc world at this time. What seat, said Rincewind, reeling from the gusts of garlic. It's the war, tri-reams, said the sergeant cheerfully. Three seats, see, one above the other, tri-reams. You get chained to the oars for years, see, and it's all according to whether you're in the top seat, up in the fresh air and that, or the bottom seat where, he grinned, you're not. So it's down to you lads. Be cooperative, and all you'll need to worry about will be the seagulls. Nah, why only the two of you, he leaned back again. Excuse me, said Eric, is that sort by any chance? You wouldn't be trying to make fun of me, would you now, boy? Only there's such a thing as quink-reams, see, you wouldn't like that at all. No, sir, said Eric, if you please, sir, I'm just a little lad led astray by bad companionship. Oh, thank you, said Rincewind bitterly. You just accidentally drew a lot of occult circles, did you, Sarge, Sarge! A soldier burst into the guard room. The sergeant looked up. There's another room, Sarge, right outside the gates this time. The sergeant grinned triumphantly at Rincewind. Oh, that's it, is it, he said. You were just the advance party come to open the gates or whatever. Right, we'll just go and sort your friends out, and we'll be right back, he indicated the captives. You stay here. If they move, do something horrible to them. Rincewind and Eric were left alone with the guard. You know what you've done, don't you, said Eric? You've only gone and taken us all the way back to the Tasortian Wars. Thousands of years. We did it at school, the wooden horse, everything. How the beautiful Eleanor was kidnapped from the Ephebians, or maybe it was by the Ephebians, and there was this siege to get her back and everything, he paused. Hey, that means I'm going to meet her. He paused again. Wow, he said. Rincewind looked around the room. It didn't look ancient, but then it wouldn't, because it wasn't yet. Everywhere in time was now, once you were there, or then. He tried to remember what little he knew of classical history, but it was just a confusion of battles, one-eyed giants, and women launching thousands of ships with their faces. Don't you say, hissed Eric, his glasses aglow, they must have brought the horse in before the soldiers are hidden in it. We know what's going to happen. We could make a fortune. How exactly? Well, the boy hesitated, we could bet on horses sort of thing. Great idea, said Rincewind. Yes, and all we've got to do is escape, then find out if they have horse races here, and then try really hard to remember the names of the horses that won races in sort thousands of years ago. They went back to looking glumly at the floor. That was the thing about time-travel, you were never ready for it. About the only thing he could hope for, Rincewind decided, was finding de Quirme's Fountain of Youth, and managing to stay alive for a few thousand years, so he'd be ready to kill his own grandfather, which was the only aspect of time-travel that had ever remotely appealed to him. He had always felt that his ancestors had it coming to them. Funny thing, though, he could remember the famous wooden horse, which had been used to trick a way into the fortified city. He didn't remember anything about there being two of them. It was something inevitable about the next thought that turned up. Excuse me, he said to the guard, this, uh, this second wooden thing outside the gate, it's probably not a horse, I expect. Well, of course, you'd know about that, wouldn't you, said the guard, you're spies.