It looked like a heavy metal stick with three horrible spikes on the end. Astvigal smiled and looked around. No, he said apparently to himself, not here. This is not public enough. Come. A hand grasped each of them by the shoulder. They could no more resist it than a couple of non-identical snowflakes could resist a flamethrower. There was a moment's disorientation, and Rincewind found himself in the largest room in the universe. It was the Great Hall. You could have built moon rockets in it. The kings of Hell might have heard of words like subtlety and discretion, but they had also heard that if you had it, you should flaunt it, and reasoned that, if you didn't have it, you should flaunt it even more, and what they didn't have was good taste. Astvigal had done what he could, but even he had been unable to do much to the basic bad design, the clashing colors, and the terrible wallpaper. He'd put in a few coffee tables and a bullfight poster, but they were more or less lost in the overall chaos, and the new antimacassar on the back of the Throne of Dread only served to highlight some of its more annoying bas-reliefs. The two humans sprawled on the floor. And now, said Astvigal, but his voice was lost in a sudden cheering. He looked up. Demons of every size and shape filled almost all the hall, piling up the walls and even hanging from the ceiling. A demonic band struck up a choice of chords on a variety of instruments. A banner, slung from one side of the hall to the other, read, HAIL TO THE CHIEF. Astvigal's brows, knitted in instant paranoia as Vasanago, trailed by the other lords, bore down on him. The old demon's face was split in a totally guileless grin, and the King nearly panicked and hit it with a trident before Vasanago reached out and slapped him on the back. Well done! he cried. What? Oh, very well done! Astvigal looked down at Rincewind. Oh, he said, yes, well, he coughed. It was nothing, he said, straightening up. I knew you people weren't getting anywhere, so I just— Not these, sneered Vasanago. Such trivial things. No, sire, I was referring to your elevation. Elevation? said Astvigal. Your promotion, sire. A great cheer went up from the younger demons, who would cheer anything. Promotion? But I am the King, Astvigal protested weakly. He could feel his grasp on events beginning to slip. Fooey, said Vasanago expansively. Fooey? Indeed, sire. King? King? Sire, I speak for all of us when I say, that is no title for a demon such as you, sire, a demon whose grasp of organizational matters and priorities, whose insight into the proper functions of our being, whose—if I may say so—sheer intellectual capabilities have taken us to new and greater depths, sire. Despite himself, Astvigal preened. Well, you know, he began. And yet we find, despite your position, that you interest yourself in the tiniest details of our work. Said Vasanago, looking down his nose at Rincewind. Such dedication! Such devotion! Astvigal swirled. Of course! I have always felt— Rincewind pulled himself up on his elbows and thought. Look out! Behind you! And so, said Vasanago, beaming like a coast full of lighthouses, the Council met and has decided—and, may I add, sire, has decided unanimously—to create an entirely new award in honour of your outstanding achievements. The importance of proper paperwork has— What award? said Astvigal, the minnows of suspicion suddenly darting across the oceans of self-esteem. The position, sire, of Supreme Life-President of Hell. The band struck up again. With your own office, much bigger than the pokey thing you have had to suffer all these years, sire—or, rather, Mr. President. The band had a go at another chord. The demons waited. Will there be— Potted plants? said Astvigal, slowly. Hosts, plantations, jungles— Astvigal appeared to be lit by gentle inner glow— And carpets—I mean, wall to wall. The walls have had to be moved apart especially to accommodate them all, sire, and thick piles, sire. Whole tribes of pygmies are wondering why the light stays on at night, sire. The bewildered King allowed himself to have an expansive arm thrown across his shoulder, and was gently led, all thoughts of vengeance forgotten, through the cheering crowds. I have always fancied one of those special things for making coffee, he murmured, as the last vestiges of self-control were eroded. A positive manufactory has been installed, sire, and a speaking-tube, sire, for you to communicate your instructions to your underlings, and, the very latest in diaries, two aeons to a page, and a thing for— Coloured marker-pens! I've always held that— Complete rainbows, sire, Basnego boomed. And let us go there without delay, sire, for I suspect that with your normal keen insight you cannot wait to get to grips with the mighty tasks ahead of you, sire. Certainly, certainly. Timely we're done indeed, an expression of vague perplexity passed across Atphigal's flushed face. These mighty tasks—nothing less than a complete, full, authoritative, searching, and in-depth analysis of our role, function, priorities, and goals, sire. Basnego stood back. The demon-lords held their breath. Atphigal frowned. The universe appeared to slow down. The stars halted momentarily in their courses. With forward planning, he said at last. A top priority, sire, which you have instantly pinpointed with your normal incisiveness, said Basnego quickly. The demon-lords breathed again. Atphigal's chest expanded several inches. I shall need special staff, of course, in order to formulate— Formulate the very thing, said Basnego, who was perhaps getting just a bit carried away. Atphigal gave him a faintly suspicious glance, but at that moment the band struck up again. The last words that Rincewind heard as the King was led out of the hall were, And in order to analyze information, I shall need— And then he was gone. The rest of the demons, aware that the entertainment seemed to be over for the day, started to mill around and drift out of the great doors. It was beginning to dawn on the brightest of them that the fires would soon be roaring again. No one seemed to be taking any notice of the two humans. Rincewind tugged at Eric's robe. This is where we ran, right? said Eric. Where we walk, said Rincewind firmly, nonchalantly, calmly, and—er—fast? You pick things up quickly, don't you? It is essential that the proper use of three wishes should bring happiness to the greatest available number of people, and this is what, in fact, had happened. The Tesymen were happy. When no amount of worshipping caused the luggage to come back and trample their enemies, they poisoned all their priests and tried enlightened atheism instead, which still meant they could kill as many people as they liked, but didn't have to get up so early to do it. The people of Thoth and Ephebe were happy—at least, the ones who write and feature in the dramas of history were happy—which is all that mattered. Now their long war was over, and they could get on with the proper concern of civilized nations, which is to prepare for the next one. The people of Hel were happy, or at least happier than hitherto. The flames were flickering brightly again, the same old familiar tortures were being inflicted on ethereal bodies, quite incapable of feeling them, and the damned had been given that insight which makes hardship so easy to bear—the absolute and certain knowledge that things could be worse. The demon lords were happy. They stood around the magic mirror, enjoying a celebratory drink. Occasionally, one of them would risk slapping Vasanago on the back. "'Shall we let them go, sir?' said a duke, peering at the climbing figures in the mirror's dark image. "'Oh, I think so,' said Vasanago, airily. "'It's always a good thing to let a few tales spread, you know—poor Oncaraji le—um—poor Oncora—um—to make everyone sit up and damn well take notice. And they have been useful, after their fashion.' He looked into the depths of his drink, exulting quietly. And yet, and yet, in the depths of his curly mind, he thought he could hear the tiny voice that would grow louder over the years—the voice that haunts all demon kings everywhere. "'Look out—behind you!' It is hard to say whether the luggage was happy or not. It had viciously attacked fourteen demons so far, and had three of them cornered in their own pit of boiling oil. Soon it would have to follow its master, but it didn't have to rush. One of the demons made a frantic grab for the bank, the luggage stamped heavily on its fingers. The creator of universes was happy. He'd just inserted one seven-sided snowflake into a blizzard as an experiment, and no one had noticed. Tomorrow he was half-inclined to try small, delicately crystallized letters of the alphabet. Alphabet snow—it could be a winner. Rincewind and Eric were happy. "'I can see blue sky,' said Eric. "'Where do you think we'll come out?' he added. "'And when?' "'Anywhere,' said Rincewind. "'Any time.' He looked down at the broad steps they were climbing. They were something of a novelty. Each one was built out of large stone letters. The one he was just stepping onto, for example, read, "'I meant it for the best.' The next one was, "'I thought you'd like it.' Eric was standing on, "'For the sake of the children.' "'Weird, isn't it?' he said. "'Why do it like this?' "'I think they're meant to be good intentions,' said Rincewind. This was a road to hell, and demons were, after all, traditionalists. And while they are, of course, irredeemably evil, they are not always bad. And so Rincewind stepped off, we are equal-opportunity employers, and through a wall, which healed up behind him, and into the world. It could, he had to admit, have been a lot worse. Rincewind asked for Gull, sitting in a pool of light in his huge, dark office, blew into the speaking-tube again. "'Hello?' he said. "'Hello?' There didn't seem to be anyone answering. Strange.' He picked up one of his coloured pens, and looked around at the stack of work behind him. All those records, to be analysed, considered, assessed, and evaluated, and then suitable management directives to be arrived at, and an in-depth policy document to be drafted, and then, after due consideration, redrafted again. He tried the tube once more. "'Hello?' "'Hello?' No one there. Still. Not to worry. Lots to do. His time was far too important to waste.' He sank his feet into his thick, warm carpet. He looked proudly at his potted plants. He tapped a complicated assembly of chromed wire and balls, which began to swing and click executively. He unscrewed the top of his pen with a firm, decisive hand. He wrote, "'What business are we