this statement did not appear to be impressed. This was because it was a small child on a potty. Laviolus changed mental gear and went on smoothly. "'On the other hand, if you don't tell me where everyone is, I shall ask the sergeant here to give you a really hard smack.' The child took its thumb out of its mouth. "'Mummy is seeing to Cassie,' it said. "'Are you Mr. Beekle?' "'I don't think so,' said Laviolus. "'Mr. Beekle is a silly.' The child withdrew its thumb, and with the air of one concluding some exhaustive research, added, "'Mr. Beekle is a poo.' "'Sergeant?' "'Sir?' "'Guard this child.' "'Yes, sir.' "'Corporal?' "'Sarge?' "'Take care of the kid.' "'Yes, sarge. Private Archaeos?' "'Yes, corp,' said the soldier, his voice gloomy with prescience. "'See to the sprog.' Private Archaeos looked around. There were only Rincewind and Eric left, and while it was true that a civilian was in every respect the lowest possible rank there was, coming somewhere after the regimental donkey, the expressions on their faces suggested that they weren't about to take any orders. Laviolus wandered across the room and listened at another curtain. "'We could tell him all kinds of stuff about his future,' hissed Eric. "'He had—I mean, he will have. All kinds of things happened to him. Shipwrecks and magic, and all his crew turned into animals and stuff like that.' "'Yes, we could say walk-home,' said Rincewind. The curtain swished aside. There was a woman there, plump, good-looking in a slightly faded way, wearing a black dress and the beginnings of a moustache. A number of children of varying sizes were trying to hide behind her. Rincewind counted at least seven of them. "'Who's that?' said Eric. "'Ahem,' said Rincewind. "'I rather think it's Eleanor of T'sort.' "'Don't be silly,' whispered Eric. "'She looks like my mum. Eleanor was much younger, and was all—' His voice gave out, and he made several wavy motions with his hand, indicative of the shape of a woman who would probably be unable to keep her balance. Rincewind tried not to catch the sergeant's eye. "'Yes,' he said, going a bit red. "'Well, you see—um—you're absolutely right. But well, it's been a long siege, hasn't it, what with one thing and another?' "'I don't see what that's got to do with it,' said Eric sternly. "'The Classics never said anything about children. They said she spent all her time mooning around the Towers of T'sort and pining for her lost love.' "'Well, yes, I expect she did pine a bit,' said Rincewind. "'Only, you know, you can only pine so much, and it must have been a bit chilly up on those Towers.' "'You can catch your death mooning,' nodded the sergeant. Laviolus watched the woman thoughtfully. Then he bowed. "'I expect you know why we're here, my lady,' he said. "'If you touch any of the children I shall scream,' said Eleanor flatly. Once again Laviolus showed that, along with his guerrilla abilities, was a marked reluctance to waste a prepared speech once he had it all sorted out in his head. "'My maiden,' he began, 'we have faced many dangers in order to rescue you and take you back to your loved—' His voice faltered. "'Once—er—this has all gone terribly wrong, hasn't it?' "'I can't help it,' said Eleanor. 'The siege seemed to go on for such a long time, and King Mausoleum was very kind, and I never liked it much in Ephebe anyway.' "'Where is everyone now—the T'sortians, I mean, apart from you?' "'They're all out on the battlements, throwing rocks, if you must know.' Laviolus flung up his hands in desperation. "'Couldn't you, you know, have slipped us a note or something, or invited us to one of the christenings?' "'You all seem to be enjoying yourselves so much,' she said." Laviolus turned and shrugged gloomily. "'All right,' he said. "'Fine. Q.E.D.—no problem. I wanted to leave home and spend ten years sitting in a swamp with a bunch of meat-headed morons. It wasn't as if I had anything important to do back home—just a little kingdom to rule, that sort of thing. O.K. "'Well, then, we might as well be off. I'm sure I don't know how I shall break it to everyone,' he said bitterly. "'They were having such fun. They'll probably have a bloody great banquet and laugh about it and get drunk. It'll be their style.' He looked at Rincewind and Eric. "'You might as well tell me what happens next,' he said. "'I'm sure you know.' "'Um,' said Rincewind. "'The city burns down,' said Eric. "'Especially the topless towers. I didn't get to see them,' he added sulkily. "'Who did it? Their lot or our lot?' said Laviolus. "'Your lot, I think,' said Eric. Laviolus sighed. "'Sounds like them,' he said. He turned to Elinor. "'Our lot—that is, my lot—are going to burn down the city,' he said. "'It sounds very heroic. Just the kind of thing they go for. It might be a good idea to come with us. Bring the kids. Make it a day out for all the family, why don't you?' Eric pulled Rincewind's ear towards his mouth. "'This is a joke, isn't it?' he said. "'She's not really at the fair, Elinor. You're just having me on.' "'It's always the same with these hot-blooded types,' said Rincewind. "'They definitely go downhill at thirty-five.' "'It's the buster that does it,' said the sergeant. "'But I read where she was the most beautiful.' "'Ah, well,' said the sergeant, "'if you're going to go around reading—' "'The thing is,' said Rincewind quickly, "'it's what they call dramatic necessity. No one's going to be interested in a war fought over a—a quite pleasant lady, moderately attractive in a good light, are they?' Eric was nearly in tears. "'But it said her face launched a thousand ships.' "'That's what you call metaphor,' said Rincewind. "'Lying,' the sergeant explained kindly. "'Anyway—' "'You shouldn't believe everything you read in the classics,' Rincewind added. ''They never check their facts. They're just out to sell legends.' Laviolus, meanwhile, was deep in argument with Elinor. "'All right, all right,' he said. "'Stay here, if you like. Why shall I care? Come on, you lot, we're going.' "'What are you doing, Private Archaos?' "'I'm being a horse, sir,' explained the soldier. "'He's Mr. Pooh,' said the child, who was wearing Private Archaos's helmet. "'Well, when you've finished being a horse, find us an oil lamp. I caught my knees a right wallop in that tunnel.' Flames roared over Tsort. The entire hubward sky was red. Rincewind and Eric watched from a rock down by the beach. "'They're not topless towers, anyway,' said Eric after a while. "'I can see the tops.' "'I think they meant topple-less towers,' Rincewind hazarded, as another one collapsed red-hot into the ruins of the city. "'And that was wrong, too.' They watched in silence for a while longer, and then Eric said, "'Funny, that. The way you tripped over the luggage and dropped the lamp and everything.' "'Yes,' said Rincewind shortly. "'Makes you think history is always going to find a way to work itself out.' "'Yes.' "'Good, though, the way your luggage rescued everyone.' "'Yes.' "'Funny to see all those kids riding on its back.' "'Yes.' "'Everyone seems quite pleased about it.' The opposing armies were, at any rate. No one was bothering to ask the civilians, whose views on warfare were never very reliable. Among the soldiery—at least, among the soldiery of a certain rank—there was a lot of back-slapping and telling of anecdotes, jovial exchanging of shields, and a general consensus that, what with fires and sieges and armadas and wooden horses and everything, it had been a jolly good war. The sound of singing echoed across the wine-dark sea. "'Ark at them,' said Laviolus, emerging from the gloom around the beached Phoebean ships. "'It'll be fifteen choruses of the Ball of Philodephus next. You mark my words. Lot of idiots with their brains and their jock-straps.' He sat down on the rock. "'Bastards,' he said, with feeling. "'Do you think Elinor will be able to explain it all to her boyfriend?' said Eric. "'I imagine so,' said Laviolus. 'They usually can.' "'She did get married, and she's got lots of children,' said Eric. Laviolus shrugged. "'A moment's wild passion,' he said. He gave Rincewind a sharp look. "'Hey, you, demon,' he said, 'I'd like a quiet word, if I may.' He led Rincewind towards the boats, pacing heavily across the damp sand, as if there was a lot weighing on his mind. "'I'm going on tonight on the tide,' he said. "'No sense in hanging about here, what with the war being over and everything. Good old dear.' "'If there's one thing I hate, it's sea voyages,' said Laviolus. He gave the nearest boat a kick. "'It's all idiots striding around and shouting, you know, pull this, lower that, avast the other. And I get seasick too.' "'It's heights with me,' said Rincewind, sympathetically. Laviolus kicked the boat again, obviously wrestling with some big emotional problem. "'The thing is,' he said wretchedly, 'you wouldn't happen to know if I get home all right, would you?' "'What?' "'It's only a few hundred miles. It shouldn't take too long, should it?' said Laviolus, radiating anxiety like a lighthouse. "'Oh!' Rincewind looked at the man's face. "'Ten years,' he thought, and all kinds of weird stuff with winged wasp-names and sea monsters. On the other hand, would it do him any good to know? "'You get home okay,' he said. "'You're well known for it, in fact. There's whole legends about you going home.' "'Phew!' Laviolus leaned against a hull, took off his helmet, and wiped his forehead. "'That's a lord off my mind, I'll tell you. I was afraid the gods might have a grudge against me.' Rincewind said nothing. "'They get a bit angry if you go around thinking up ideas like wooden horses and tunnels,' said Laviolus. 'They're traditionalists, you know. They prefer people just to hack at one another. I thought, you see, that if I could show people how to get what they wanted more easily they'd stop being so bloody stupid.' From further along the shore-line came the sounds of male voices raised in song. "'Best of virgins came down from Helio, Daly, Philo, Daly, Phobos, Chrominos, Meninos, and when the ball was over there were—' "'It never works,' said Rincewind. "'It's got to be worth a try, though, hasn't it?' "'Oh, yeah.' Laviolus slapped him on the back. "'Cheer up,' he said. 'Things can only get better.' They walked out into the dark breakers where Laviolus's ship was riding at anchor, and Rincewind watched him swim out and climb aboard. After a while the oars were shipped—or unshipped, or whatever they called it when they were stuck through the holes in the sides, and the boat moved slowly out into the bay. A few voices floated back over the surf. "'Point the pointed end that way, Sergeant.' "'Aye, aye, sir.' "'And don't shout. Did I tell you to shout? Why do you have to shout? Now I'm going downstairs for a lie-down.' Rincewind trudged back up the beach. "'The trouble is,' he said, "'is that things never get better. They just stay the same, only more so. But he's going to have enough to worry about.' Behind him Eric blew his nose. "'That was the saddest thing I've ever heard.' He said. From further along the beach the Ephibian and Sautian armies were still in full voice around their convivial campfires. "'The village harpy she was there.' "'Come on,' said Rincewind, "'let's go home.' "'You know the funny thing about his name?' said Eric, as they strolled along the sand. "'No. What do you mean?' "'Laviolus means Rinser of Winds.' Rincewind looked at him. "'He's my ancestor.' He said. "'Who knows?' said Eric. "'Oh, gosh!' Rincewind thought about this. "'Well, I wish I'd told him to avoid getting married, or visiting Ankh-Morpork. It probably isn't even built yet.' Rincewind tried snapping his fingers. This time it worked. Astophagor sat back. He wondered what did happen to Laviolus. "'Gods and demons, being creatures outside of time, don't move in it like bubbles in the stream. Everything happens at the same time for them. This should mean that they know everything that is going to happen, because, in a sense, it already has. The reason they don't is that reality is a big place with a lot of interesting things going on, and keeping track of all of them is like trying to use a very big video recorder with no freeze button or tape counter. It's usually easier just to wait and see. One day he'd have to go and look. Right here and now, insofar as the words can be employed about an area outside of space and time, matters were not progressing well. Eric seemed marginally more likeable, which wasn't acceptable. He also appeared to have changed the course of history, although this is impossible, since the only thing you can do to the course of history is facilitate it. What was needed was something climactic, something really soul-destroying. The Demon King realised he was twirling his moustaches. The trouble with snapping your fingers is that you never knew what it would lead to. Everything around Rincewind was black. It wasn't simply an absence of colour, it was a darkness that flatly denied any possibility that colour might ever have existed. His feet weren't touching anything, and he appeared to be floating. There was something else missing. He couldn't quite put his finger on it. Are you there, Eric? he ventured. A clear voice nearby said, Yes, are you there, Demon? Yes. Where are we? Are we falling? I don't think so, said Rincewind, speaking from experience. There's no rushing wind. You get a rushing wind when you're falling. Also, your past life flashes before your eyes, and I haven't seen anything I recognise yet. Rincewind? Yes. When I open my mouth, no sounds come out. Don't be— Rincewind hesitated. He wasn't making any sound either. He knew what he was saying. It just wasn't reaching the outside world. But he could hear Eric. Perhaps the words just gave up on his ears and went straight to his brain. It's probably some kind of magic or something, he said. There's no air. That's why there's no sound. All the little bits of air sort of knock together like marbles. That's how you get sound, you know. Is it? Gosh! So we're surrounded by absolutely nothing, said Rincewind. Total nothing. He hesitated. There's a word for it, he said. It's what you get when there's nothing left and everything's been used up. Yes, I think it's called the bill, said Eric. Rincewind gave this some thought. It sounded about right. Okay, he said. The bill. That's where we are. Floating in absolute bill. Total, complete, rock-hard bill. Astvigl was going frantic now. He had spells that could find anyone, anywhere, any when, and they weren't anywhere. One minute he was watching them on the beach, the next, nothing. That's left only two other places. Fortunately, he chose the wrong one first. Even some stars would be nice, said Eric. There's something very odd about that. There's something very odd about all this, said Rincewind. I mean, do you feel cold? No. Well, do you feel warm? No, I don't feel anything much, really. No hot, no cold, no light, no heat, no air, said Rincewind. Just bill. How long have we been here? Don't know. Seems like ages, but— Ah-ha! I'm not sure there's any time either. Not what you'd call proper time. Just the kind of time people make up as they go along. Well, I didn't expect to see anyone else here, said a voice by Rincewind's ear. It was a slightly put-upon voice, a voice made for complaining in, but at least there was no hint of menace. Rincewind let himself float around. A little rat-faced man was sitting cross-legged, watching him with vague suspicion. He had a pencil behind one ear. Ah, hello, said Rincewind. And where is here, exactly? Nowhere. Sold point, innit? Nowhere at all? Not yet. All right, said Eric. When is it going to be somewhere? Hard to say, said the little man. Looking at the pair of you, and taking one thing with another, metabolic rates and all that, I'd say this place is due to become somewhere in, well, give or take a bit, in about five hundred seconds. He began to unwrap the pack in his lap. Fancy a sandwich while we're waiting? What? Would I— At this point Rincewind's stomach, aware that if his brain was allowed to make the running it was in danger of losing the initiative, cut in and prompted him to say, What sort? Search me. What sort would you like it to be? Sorry? Don't mess about. Just say what sort you'd like it to be. Oh? Rincewind stared at him. Well, if you've got egg-and-cress— Let there be egg-and-cress sort of thing, said the little man. He reached into the package and proffered a white triangle to Rincewind. Gosh! said Rincewind. What a coincidence! It shall be starting any minute now, said the little man. Over—not that they've got any proper directions sorted out yet, of course. Not them. There. All I can see is darkness, said Eric. No, you can't, said the little man triumphantly. You're just seeing what there is before the darkness has been installed sort of thing. He gave the not-yet-darkness a dirty look. Come on, he said. Why are we waiting? Why are we waiting? Waiting for what? said Rincewind. Everything? Everything what? said Rincewind. Everything. Not everything what? Everything sort of thing. Astfagull peered around through the swirling gas-clouds. At least he was in the right place. The whole point about the end of the universe was that you couldn't go past it accidentally. The last few embers winked out. Time and space collided silently and collapsed. Astfagull coughed. It can get so very lonely when you're twenty million light-years from home. Anyone there? he said. Yes. The voice was right by his ear. Even demon kings can shiver. Apart from you, I mean, he said. Have you seen anybody? Yes. Who? Everyone. Astfagull sighed. I mean anyone recently? It's been very quiet, said Death. Damn! Were you expecting someone else? I thought there might be someone called Rincewind, but- Astfagull began. Death's eye-sockets flared red. The wizard? he said. Now he's a deep- Astfagull stopped. For what would have been several seconds, had time still existed, he floated in a state of horrible suspicion. A human? he growled. It is stretching the term a little, but you are broadly correct. Well, I'll be damned, Astfagull said. I believe you already are. The demon king extended a shaking hand. His mounting fury was overriding his sense of style. His red silk gloves ripped as the talons unfolded. And then, because it's never a good idea to get on the wrong side of anyone with a scythe, Astfagull said, Sorry you've been troubled, and vanished. Only when he judged himself out of Death's extremely acute hearing did he scream his rage. Nothingness uncoiled its interminable length through the drafty spaces