represented a very restricted range of choices compared to the kind of places magic could transport you to. The actual travelling was easy. It was achieving a destination which would, for example, allow you to survive in all four dimensions at once, that took the real effort. In fact, the scope for error was so huge it seemed something of an anticlimax to emerge in a fairly ordinary sandy-floored cavern. It contained, on the far wall, a door. There was no doubt it was a forbidding door. It looked as though its designer had studied all the cell doors he could find and had then gone away and produced a version for, as it were, full visual orchestra. It was more of a portal. Some ancient and probably fearful warning was etched over its crumbling arch, but it was destined to remain unread because over it someone else had pasted a bright red-and-white notice which read, You don't have to be damned to work here, but it helps. Rincewind squinted up at the notice. Of course I can read it, he said. I just don't happen to believe it. Multiple exclamation marks, he went on, shaking his head, are a sure sign of a diseased mind. He looked behind him. The glowing outlines of Eric's magic circle faded and winked out. I'm not being picky, you understand, he said. It's just that I thought you said you could get us back to Ankh. This isn't Ankh. I can tell by the little details, like the flickering red shadows and the distant screaming. In Ankh the screaming is usually much closer, he added. I think I did very well to get it to work at all, said Eric, bridling. You're not supposed to be able to run magic circles in reverse. In theory it means you stay in the circle and reality moves around you. I think I did very well. You see, he added, his voice suddenly vibrating with enthusiasm, if you rewrite the source codex—and this is the difficult bit—you root it through a high level—yes, yes, yes, very clever. What will you people think up next, said Rincewind? The only thing is we're—I think it's quite possible that we're in hell. Oh? Eric's lack of reaction made Rincewind curious. You know, he added, the place with all the demons in it? Oh? Not a good place to be, it's generally felt, said Rincewind. You think we might be able to explain? Rincewind thought about this. He wasn't, when you got right down to it, quite sure what it was that demons did to you, but he did know what humans did to you, and after a lifetime in Ankh Moorpork this place could turn out to be an improvement—warmer, at any rate. He looked at the door knocker. It was black and horrible, but that didn't matter because it was so tied up that it couldn't be used. Beside it, with all the signs of being installed recently by someone who didn't know what they were doing and didn't want to do it, was a button set into the splintered woodwork. Rincewind gave it an experimental prod. The sound it produced might once have been a popular tune, possibly even one written by a skilled composer to whom had been vouchsafed, for a brief ecstatic moment, the music of the spheres. Now, however, it just went bing-bong-ding-dong, and it would be a lazy use of language to say that the thing that answered the door was a nightmare. Nightmares are usually rather daft things, and it's very hard to explain to a listener what was so dreadful about your socks coming alive, or giant carrots jumping out of the hedgerows. This thing was the kind of terrifying thing that could only be created by someone sitting down and thinking horrible thoughts very clearly. It had more tentacles than legs, but fewer arms than heads. It also had a badge. The badge said, My name is Ergel Flogger, spawn of the pit and loathly guardian of the dread portal. How may I help you? It was not very happy about this. Yes, it rasped. Rincewind was still reading the badge. How may you help us? he said, aghast. Ergel Flogger, who bore a certain resemblance to the late Quezova Coatl, ground some of its teeth. Hi there, it intoned, in the manner of one who has had the script patiently explained to him by someone with a red-hot branding iron. My name is Ergel Flogger, spawn of the pit, and I am your host for today. May I be the first to welcome you to our luxuriously appointed— Hang on a moment, said Rincewind. Chosen for your convenience, Ergel Flogger rumbled. There's something not quite right here, said Rincewind. Full regard for the wishes of you, the consumer, the demon continued stoically. Excuse me, said Rincewind. As pleasurable as possible, said Ergel Flogger. It made a noise like a sigh of relief from somewhere deep in its mandibles. Now it appeared to be listening for the first time. Yes. What? it said. Where are we? said Rincewind. Various mouths beamed. Quail mortals! What? We're in a bird? Grovel and cower, mortals! the demon corrected itself. For you are condemned to everlast— It paused and gave a little whimper. There will be a period of corrective therapy, it corrected itself again, spitting out each word, which we hope to make as instructive and enjoyable as possible, with due regard to all the rights of you, the customer. It eyed Rincewind with several eyes. Dreadful, isn't it? it said in a more normal voice. Don't blame me. If it was up to me, it would be the old burning-thing-is-up-there-what's-it too sweet. This is how, isn't it? said Eric. I've seen pictures. You're right there, said the demon mournfully. It sat down, or at least folded itself in some complicated way. Personal service, that's what it used to be. People used to feel that we were taking an interest, that they weren't just numbers but were victims. We had a tradition of service. Fat lot, he cares. But what am I telling you my troubles for? It's not as if you haven't got plenty of your own, what with being dead and being here. You're not musicians, are you? Actually, we're not even— Rincewind began. The demon ignored him, but got up and began to plod ponderously down the dank corridor, beckoning them to follow. You'd really hate it here if you was musicians. I hate it more, I mean. The wolves play music all day long. Well, he calls it music. I've got nothing against a good tune, mark you. Something to scream along with, but this isn't it. I mean, I heard where we're supposed to have all the best tunes. So why have we got all this stuff that sounds like someone turned on the piano and then walked away and left it? In point of fact, and then there's the potted plants. Don't get me wrong, I like to see a bit of green around the place. Only some of the lads says these plants aren't real, but what I say is they must be. No one in their right mind would make a plant that looks like a dark green leather and smells like a dead sloth. He says it gives the place a friendly and open aspect. Friendly and open aspect? I've seen keen gardeners break down and cry, I'm telling you. They said it made everything we did to them afterwards seem like an improvement. Dead is not what we—said Rincewind, trying to hammer the words into a gap in the thing's endless monotone, but he was too late. The coffee machine now. The coffee machine's a good one, I'll grant you. We only used to drown people in lakes of cat's pee. We didn't make them buy it by the cup. We're not dead! Eric shouted. Ergolflogger came to a quivering halt. Of course you're dead, it said, else you wouldn't be here. Can't imagine live people coming here. They wouldn't last five minutes. It opened several of its mouths, showing a choice of fangs. Ha ha ha! It added. If I was to catch any live people down here! Not for nothing had Rincewind survived for years in the paranoid complexities of Unseen University. He felt almost at home. His reflexes operated with incredible precision. You mean you weren't told? He said. It was hard to see if Ergolflogger's expression changed, if only because it was hard to know what part of it was expression, but it definitely projected a familiar air of sudden and resentful uncertainty. Told what? It said. Rincewind looked at Eric. You'd think they'd tell people, wouldn't you? Tell them what? Ow ow ow! said Eric, clutching his ankle. That's modern management for you, said Rincewind, his face radiating angry concern. They go ahead and make all these changes, all these new arrangements, and do they consult the very people who formed the backbone? Exoskeleton, corrected the demon, or other calcareous or chitinous structure of the organization? Rincewind finished smoothly. He waited expectantly for what he knew would have to come. Not them, said Ergolflogger. Too busy sticking up notices, they are. I think that's pretty disgusting, said Rincewind. Do you know, said Ergolflogger, they wouldn't let me on the club eighteen thousand to thirty thousand holiday? Said I was too old. Said I would spoil the fun. What's the Netherworld coming to? said Rincewind sympathetically. They never come down here, you know, said the demon, sagging a bit. They never tell me anything. Oh yes, very important. Only keeping a bloody gate. Most important, I don't think. Look, said Rincewind, you wouldn't like me to have a word, would you? Down here all hours, seeing I'm in. Perhaps if we spoke to someone, said Rincewind. The demon sniffed from several noses at once. Would you, it said, be happy to, said Rincewind. Ergolflogger brightened a little, but not too much, just in case. Can't do any harm, can it, it said. Rincewind steeled himself and patted the thing on what he fervently hoped was its back. Don't you worry about it, he said. That's very kind of you. Rincewind looked across the shuddering heap at Eric. We'd better go, he said, so we're not late for our appointment. He made frantic signals over the demon's head. Eric grinned. Yeah, for our appointment, he said. They walked up the wide passage. Eric started to giggle hysterically. This is where we run, right? This is where we walk, said Rincewind. Just walk. The important thing is to act nonchalant. The important thing is to get the timing right. He looked at Eric. Eric looked at him. Behind them, Ergolflogger made a kind of I've-just-worked-it-out noise. About now, said Eric. About now I think we'd do it, yes. They ran. Hell wasn't what Rincewind had been led to expect, although there were signs of what it might once have been. A few clinkers in a corner, a bad scorch mark on the ceiling. It was hot, though, with the kind of heat that you get by boiling air inside an oven for years. Hell, it has been suggested, is other people. This has always come as a bit of a surprise to many working demons, who had always thought that hell was sticking sharp things into people and pushing them into lakes of blood and so on. This is because demons, like most people, have failed to distinguish between the body and the soul. The fact was that, as droves of demon kings had noticed, there was a limit to what you could do to a soul with evil. Red-hot tweezers. Because even fairly evil and corrupt souls were bright enough to realize that since they didn't have the concomitant body and nerve endings attached to them, there was no real reason, other than force of habit, why they should suffer excruciating agony. So they didn't. Demons went on doing it anyway, because numb and mindless stupidity is part of what being a demon is all about. But since no one was suffering, they didn't enjoy it much either, and the whole thing was pointless. Centuries and centuries of pointlessness. Astvigal had adopted, without realizing what he was doing, a radically new approach. Demons can move inter-dimensionally, and so he'd found the basic ingredients for a very worthwhile lake-of-blood equivalent, as it were, for the soul. Learn from humans, he'd told the demon lords. Learn from humans. It's amazing what you can learn from humans. You take, for example, a certain type of hotel. It is probably an English version of an American hotel, but operated with that peculiarly English genius for taking something American and subtracting from it its one worthwhile aspect, so that you end up with slow fast food, West country and Western music, and, well, this hotel. It's early closing day. The bar is really just a pastel-pink panelled table with a silly ice-bucket on it, set in one corner, and it won't be open for hours yet. And then you add rain, and let the one channel available on the only TV be, perhaps, Welsh Channel 4, showing its usual Mobius-Eisteddfod from Pant y Gerdw. And there is only one book in this hotel, left behind by a previous victim. It is one of those where the name of the author is on the front in raised gold letters much bigger than the title, and it probably has a rose and a bullet on there too. Half the pages are missing. And the only cinema in the town is showing something with subtitles and French umbrellas in it. And then you stop time, but not experience. So that it seems as though the very fluff in the carpet is gradually rising up to fill the brain, and your mouth starts to taste like an old denture. And you make it last forever and ever. That's even longer than from now until opening time. And then you distill it. Of course, the Discworld lacks a number of the items listed above, but boredom is universal, and Astrovagal had achieved in Hell a particularly high brand of boredom, which is like the boredom you get which a. is costing you money, and b. is taking place while you should be having a nice time. The caverns that opened before Rincewind were full of mist and tasteful room dividers. Now and again screams of ennui rose from between the pot plants, but mainly there was the terrible numbing silence of the human brain being reduced to cream-cheese from the inside out. I don't understand, said Eric. Where are the furnaces? Where are the flames? Where, he added hopefully, are the succubi? Rincewind peered at the nearest exhibit. A disconsolate demon, whose badge proclaimed it to be Azarimoth the Stench of Dog-Breath, and moreover hoped that the reader would have a nice day, was sitting on the edge of a shallow pit wherein lay a rock, on which a man was chained and spread-eagled. A very tired-looking bird was perched beside him. Rincewind thought that Eric's parrot had it bad, but this bird had definitely been through the mangle of life. It looked as though it had been plucked first, and then had its feathers stuck back on. Curiosity overcame Rincewind's usual cowardice. What's going on? he said. What's happening to him? The demon stopped kicking his heels on the edge of the pit. It didn't occur to it to question Rincewind's presence. It assumed that he wouldn't be here unless he had a right to be. The alternative was unbelievable. I don't know what he'd done, it said, but when I first came here his punishment was to be chained to that rock, and every day an eagle would come down and peck his liver out. Bit of an old favourite, that one. It doesn't look as though it's attacking him now, said Rincewind. Nah, it's all changed. Now it flies down every day and tells him about its hernia operation. Now it's effective, I'll grant you, said the demon sadly, but it's not what I'd call torture. Rincewind turned away, but not before catching a glimpse of the look of terminal agony on the victim's face. It was terrible. There was worse, however. In the next pit, several chained and groaning people were being shown a series of paintings. A demon in front of them was reading from a script. This is when we were in the fifth circle, only you can't see where we stayed. It was just off to the left there. And this is that funny couple we met. You'd never believe it. They lived on the icy plains of Doom, just next door to— Eric looked at Rincewind. It's showing them pictures of itself on holiday, he said. They both shrugged and walked away, shaking their heads. Then there was a small hill. At the bottom of the hill there was a round rock. Beside the rock sat a manacled man, his despairing head buried in his hands. A squat green demon stood beside him, almost buckling under the weight of an enormous book. I've heard of this one, said Eric. Man who went and defied the gods or something, got to keep pushing that rock up the hill, even though it rolls back all the time. The demon looked up, but first it trilled. He must listen to the unhealthy and unsafety regulations governing the lifting and moving of large objects. Volume 93 of the Commentaries, in fact. The regulations themselves comprised a further 1,440 volumes. Part 1, that is. Rincewind had always liked boredom, treasuring it if only because of its rarity value. It had always seemed to him that the only times in his life when he wasn't being chased, imprisoned, or hit were when he was being dropped from things. And while falling a long way always had a certain sameness about it, it did not really count as boring. The only time he could look back on with a certain amount of fondness was his brief spell as assistant librarian at Unseen University, when there wasn't much to do except read books, make sure the librarian's banana supply wasn't interrupted, and read.