it," said Eric. All the leading chariot seemed to contain, apart from the driver, was a squat, basically cube-shaped man, wearing a puma-skin outfit and a feather head-dress. The runners panted to a halt, and Rincewind saw that each man wore what would probably be described as a primitive sword, made by affixing shards of obsidian into a wooden club. They looked to him no less deadly than sophisticated, extremely civilized swords. In fact, they looked worse. "'Well,' said Eric. "'Well, what?' said Rincewind. "'Tell him to give me my tribute.' The fat man got down ponderously, marched over to Eric, and to Rincewind's extreme surprise grovelled. Rincewind felt something claw its way up his back and on to his shoulder, when a voice like a sheet of metal being torn in half said, "'That's better. Very wass-name comfy. If you try to knock me off, demon, you can wass-name your ear good-bye. What a turn-up for the Scrolls, eh? They seem to be expecting him.' "'Why do you keep saying wass-name?' said Rincewind. "'Limited wass-name, doodah, thingy, you know. It's got words in it,' said the parrot. "'Dictionary?' said Rincewind. The passengers in the other chariots had got out and were also grovelling to Eric, who was beaming like an idiot. The parrot considered this. "'Yeah, probably,' it said. "'I've got to wing it to you,' it went on. "'I thought you were a bit of a wass-name at the start, but you seem to be delivering a wass-name.' "'Demon?' said Eric, airily. "'Yes.' "'What are they saying? Can't you speak their language?' "'Er, no,' said Rincewind. "'I can read it, though,' he called out, as Eric turned away. "'If you could just sort of make signs for them to write it down—' It was around noon. In the jungle behind Rincewind, creatures whooped and gibbered. Mosquitoes the size of hummingbirds whined around his head. "'Of course,' he said, for the tenth time, "'they'd never really got round to inventing paper.' The stonemason stood back, handed the latest blunted obsidian chisel to his assistant, and gave Rincewind an expectant look. Rincewind stood back and examined the rock critically. "'It's very good,' he said. "'I mean, it's a very good likeness. You've got his hairstyle and everything. "'Of course, he's not as, um, square as that normally, but yes, very good. "'And here's the chariot, and here's the step pyramids, yes. "'Well, it looks as though they want you to go to the city with them,' he said to Eric. "'Tell them yes,' said Eric firmly. Rincewind turned to the headman. "'Yes,' he said. "'Hunched figure in triple-feathered headdress over three dots.' Rincewind sighed. Without saying a word, the stonemason put a fresh stone chisel into his unresisting fingers and manhandled a new slab of granite into position. "'One of the problems of being a tesuman, apart from having a godlike quez over coattle, "'is that if you unexpectedly need to order an extra pint of milk to-morrow, "'you probably should have started writing the note for the milkman last month. "'Tesuman are the only people who beat themselves to death with their own suicide notes.' It was late afternoon by the time the chariots trotted into the slab city around the largest pyramid between lines of cheering tesuman. "'This is more like it,' said Eric, graciously acknowledging the cheers. "'They're very pleased to see us.' "'Yes,' said Rincewind gloomily. "'I wonder why?' "'Well, because I'm the new ruler, of course.' "'H'mm,' Rincewind glanced sidelong at the parrot, who had been unnaturally silent for some time, "'and was now cowering up against his ear like an elderly spinster in a strip-club. "'It was having serious thoughts about the exquisite feather headdresses. "'What's-name bastards!' it croaked. "'Any what's-name lays a hand on me, and that what's-name is minus one finger, I'm telling you!' "'There's something not right about this,' said Rincewind. "'What's that?' said the parrot. "'Everything.' "'I'm telling you, one feather out of place!' Rincewind wasn't used to people being pleased to see him. "'It was unnatural, and boded no good. "'These people were not only cheering, they were throwing flowers and hats. "'The hats were made out of stone, but the thought was there. "'Rincewind thought they were rather odd hats. "'They didn't have crowns. "'They were, in fact, mere disks with holes in the middle.' "'The procession trotted up the wide avenues of the city "'to a cluster of buildings at the foot of the pyramid, "'where another group of civic dignitaries was waiting for them. "'They were wearing lots of jewellery. "'It was all basically the same. "'There are quite a lot of uses to which you can put a stone disk with a hole in the middle, "'and the tesemen had explored all but one of them. "'More important, though, were the boxes and boxes of treasure stacked in front of them. "'They were stuffed with jewels.' "'Eric's eyes widened. "'That tribute!' he said. "'Rincewind gave up. "'It really was working. "'He didn't know how. "'He didn't know why. "'But at last it was all going right. "'The setting sun glinted off a dozen fortunes. "'Of course it belonged to Eric, presumably, "'but maybe there was enough for him, too.' "'Naturally,' he said weakly. "'What else did you expect?' "'And there was feasting, "'and long speeches that Rincewind couldn't understand, "'but which were punctuated with cheers and nods and bows in Eric's direction. "'And there were long recitals of tesemen music, "'which sounds like someone clearing a particularly difficult nostril.' "'Rincewind left Eric sitting proudly enthroned in the firelight, "'and wandered disconsolately across to the pyramid. "'I was enjoying the worst time,' said the parrot reproachfully. "'I can't settle down,' said Rincewind. "'I'm sorry, but this sort of thing has never happened to me before, "'all the jewels and things. "'Everything going as expected. It's not right.' "'He looked up the monstrous face of the steep pyramid, "'red and flickering in the firelight. "'Every huge block was carved with a bass relief "'of tesemen doing terribly inventive things to their enemies. "'It suggested that the tesemen, "'whatever sterling qualities they possessed, "'were not traditionally inclined to welcome perfect strangers "'and heap them with jewels. "'The overall effect of the great heap of carvings "'was very artistic. "'It was just the details that were horrible.' "'While working his way along the wall he came to a huge door, "'which artistically portrayed a group of prisoners "'apparently being given a complete medical check-up. "'But from a distance it did, anyway. "'Close to? No. "'It opened into a short torch-lit tunnel. "'Rincewind took a few steps along it, "'telling himself he could always hurry out again, "'and came out into a lofty space "'which occupied most of the inside of the pyramid. "'There were more torches all around the walls, "'which illuminated everything quite well. "'That wasn't really welcome, "'because what they mainly illuminated was a giant-sized statue "'of Quez over Coatl the Feathered Boa. "'If you had to be in a room with that statue, "'you'd prefer it to be pitch-dark. "'Or, then again, perhaps not. "'A better option would be to put the thing in a darkened room "'while you had insomnia a thousand miles away, "'trying to forget what it looked like. "'It's just a statue,' Rincewind told himself. "'It's not real. "'They just used their imagination, that's all.' "'What the wasp's name is he?' said the parrot. "'It's their god. "'Get away!' "'No, really. "'It's Quez over Coatl. "'Half-man, half-chicken, half-jaguar, half-serpent, "'half-scorpion and half-mad.' "'The parrot's beak moved as it worked this out. "'That makes a wasp's name total of three homicidal maniacs,' it said. "'About right, yes,' said the statue. "'On the other hand,' said Rincewind instantly, "'I do think it's frightfully important for people "'to have the right to worship in their own special way, "'and now I think we'll just be going, so just—' "'Please don't leave me here,' said the statue. "'Please take me with you.' "'Could be tricky, could be tricky,' Rincewind said hurriedly, "'backing away. "'It's not me you understand. "'It's just that where I come from "'everyone has this racial prejudice thing "'against thirty-foot-high people "'with fangs and talons and necklaces of skulls all over them. "'I just think you'll have trouble fitting in.' "'The parrot tweaked his ear. "'It's coming from behind the statue, you stupid wasp's name!' it croaked. "'It turned out to be coming from a hole in the floor. "'A pale face peered short-sightedly up at Rincewind "'from the depths of a pit. "'It was an elderly, good-natured face "'with a faintly worried expression. "'Hello?' said Rincewind. "'You don't know what it means to hear a friendly voice again,' "'said the face, breaking into a grin. "'If you could just sort of help me up—' "'Sorry?' said Rincewind. "'You're a prisoner, are you?' "'Alas there, this is so.' "'I don't know that I ought to go around "'rescuing prisoners just like that,' said Rincewind. "'I mean, you might have done anything. "'I am entirely innocent of all crimes, I assure you.' "'Ah, well, so you say,' said Rincewind gravely. "'But if the Tesymen have judged—' "'Wasp-name! Wasp-name! Wasp-name!' "'shrieked the parrot in his ear as it bounced up and down on his shoulder. "'Haven't you got the faintest? Where have you been? "'He's a prisoner—a prisoner in a temple. "'You've got to rescue prisoners in temples. "'That's what they're bloody there for.' "'No, it isn't,' snapped Rincewind. "'That's all you know. "'He's probably here to be sacrificed. "'Isn't that right?' "'He looked at the prisoner for confirmation. "'The face nodded. "'Indeed you are correct. "'They are flayed alive, in fact.' "'There,' said Rincewind to the parrot. "'See? You think you know everything. "'He's here to be flayed alive.' "'Every inch of skin removed to the accompaniment of exquisite pain,' "'added the prisoner helpfully. "'Rincewind paused. "'He thought he knew the meaning of the word exquisite, "'and it didn't seem to belong anywhere near pain. "'What? Every bit?' he said. "'This is apparently the case. "'Gosh!' "'What was it you did?' "'You'd never believe me,' he said. "'The Demon King let the mirror darken "'and drummed his fingers on his desk for a moment. "'Then he picked up a speaking-tube and blew into it. "'Eventually a distant voice said, "'Gyroscope?' "'Yes, sir,' snapped the King. "'The distant voice muttered something. "'Yes, sir,' it added. "'Do we have a ques-over-coattle working here?' "'I'll see, guv.' "'The voice faded, came back. "'Yes, guv.' "'Is he a duke, earl, count, or baron?' said the King. "'No, guv.' "'Well, what is he?' "'There was a long silence at the other end. "'Well?' said the King. "'He's no one much, guv.' "'The King glared at the tube for some time. "'You try,' he thought. "'You make proper plans, you try to get organized, "'you try to help people, and this is what you get. "'Send him to see me,' he said. "'Outside the music rose to a crescendo and stopped. "'The fires crackled. "'From the distant jungles a thousand glowing eyes "'looked at the proceedings. "'The High Priest stood up and made a speech. "'Eric beamed like a pumpkin. "'A long line of Tessamen brought baskets of jewels "'which they scattered before him. "'Then the High Priest made a second speech. "'This one seemed to end on a question. "'Fine,' said Eric. "'Jolly good, keep it up.' "'He scratched his ear and ventured, "'You can all have a half-holiday.' "'The High Priest repeated the question again "'in a slightly impatient tone of voice. "'One yes,' said Eric, just in case they were unclear. "'You've got it exactly right.' "'The High Priest spoke again. "'This time there was no slightly about it. "'Let's just run through this again, shall we?' "'said the Demon King. "'He leaned back in his throne. "'You happened to find the Tessamen one day "'and decided, I think I recall your words correctly, "'that they were a bunch of stone-age no-hopers "'sitting around in a swamp, being no trouble to anyone. "'Am I right? "'Whereupon you entered the mind of one of their High Priests. "'I believe at that time they worshipped a small stick. "'Drove him insane and inspired the tribes to unite, "'terrorize their neighbours and bring forth upon the continent "'a new nation dedicated to the proposition "'that all men should be taken to the top of ceremonial pyramids "'and be chopped up with stone knives.' "'The King pulled his notes towards him. "'Oh yes, some of them were also to be flayed alive,' he added. "'Quez over quattle,' shuffled his feet. "'Whereupon,' said the King, "'they immediately engaged in a prolonged war with just about everyone else, "'bringing death and destruction to thousands of moderately blameless people, etc., etc. "'Now look, this sort of thing has got to stop!' "'Quez over quattle' swayed back a bit. "'It was only, you know, an obby,' said the Imp. "'I thought, you know, it was the right thing sort of thing. "'Death and destruction and that.' "'You did, did you?' said the King. "'Thousands of more or less innocent people dying. "'Straight out of our hands,' he snapped his fingers, "'just like that. "'Straight off to their happy hunting ground or whatever. "'That's the trouble with you people. "'You don't think of the big picture. "'I mean look at the Tesyman. "'Gloomy, unimaginative, obsessive. "'By now they could have invented a whole bureaucracy and taxation system "'that would have turned the minds of the continent to slag, "'instead of which they're just a bunch of second-rate axe-murderers. "'What a waste!' "'Quez over quattle' squirmed. "'The King swiveled the throne back and forth a bit. "'Now I want you to go straight back down there and tell them you're sorry,' "'he said. "'Pardon?' "'Tell them you've changed your mind. "'Tell them that what you really wanted them to do was strive day and night "'to improve the lot of their fellow men. "'It'll be a winner.' "'What?' said Quez over quattle, looking extremely shifty. "'You want me to manifest myself?' "'They've seen you already, haven't they? "'I saw the statue. "'It's very lifelike.' "'Well, yes, I've appeared in dreams and that,' said the demon uncertainly. "'Right, then. "'Get on with it.' "'Quez over quattle was clearly unhappy about something. "'Eh?' he said. "'You want me to actually materialize sort of thing? "'I mean, actually sort of turn up on the spot?' "'Yes.' "'Oh!' The prisoner dusted himself down and extended a wrinkled hand to Rincewind. "'Many thanks. "'Ponce d'Aquerm,' he said. "'Pardon?' "'It's my name.' "'Oh, it's a proud old name,' said d'Aquerm, searching Rincewind's eyes for any traces of mockery. "'Fine,' said Rincewind blankly. "'We were searching for the Fountain of Youth,' d'Aquerm went on. Rincewind looked him up and down. "'Any luck?' he said politely. 'Not as significantly, no.' Rincewind peered back down into the pit. "'You said we,' he said. 'Where's everyone else? They got religion.' Rincewind looked up at the statue of Quez over quattle. It took no imagination whatsoever to imagine what kind. "'I think,' he said carefully, 'that we had better go.' "'Too true,' said the old man. "'And quickly, too, before the ruler of the world turns up.' Rincewind went cold. "'It starts,' he thought. 'I knew it was all going to turn out badly, and this is where it starts. I must have an instinct for these things.' "'How do you know about that?' he said. "'Oh, they've got this prophecy. Well, not a prophecy, really. It's more, the entire history of the world start to finish. "'It's written all over this pyramid,' said de Quirme cheerfully. "'My word, I wouldn't like to be the ruler when he arrives. They've got plans.' Eric stood up. "'Now, just you listen to me,' he said. "'I'm not going to stand for this sort of thing. I'm your ruler, you know.' Rincewind stared at the blocks nearest the statue. It had taken the Tessiemen two stories, twenty years, and ten thousand tonnes of granite to explain what they intended to do to the ruler of the world, but the result was, well, graphic. He would be left in no doubt that they were annoyed. He might even go so far as to deduce that they were quite vexed. "'But why do they give him all the jewels to start with?' he said, pointing. "'Well, he is the ruler,' said de Quirme. "'He's entitled to some respect, I suppose.' Rincewind nodded. "'There was a sort of justice in it. If you were a tribe who lived in a swamp in the middle of a damp forest, didn't have any metal, had been saddled with a god like Quezoba Coatl, and then found someone who said he was in charge of the whole affair, you probably would want to spend some time explaining to him how incredibly disappointed you were. The Tessiemen had never seen any reason to be subtle in dealing with deities. "'It was a very good likeness of Eric.' His eye followed the story on to the next wall. "'This block showed a very good likeness of Rincewind.' He had a parrot on his shoulder. "'Hang on,' he said. "'That's me.' "'You should see what they're doing to you on the next block,' said the parrot smugly. "'It'll turn your wass name.' Rincewind looked at the block. His wass name revolved. "'We'll just leave very quietly,' he said firmly. "'I mean, we won't stop to thank them for the meal. We can always send them a letter later. You know, so as not to be impolite.' "'Just a moment,' said de Quirme, as Rincewind dragged at his arm. "'I haven't had a chance to read all the blocks yet. I want to see how the world's going to end. How it's going to end for everyone else, I don't know,' said Rincewind grimly, dragging him down the tunnel. "'I know how it's going to end for me.' He stepped out into the dawnlight, which was fine. Where he went wrong was stepping into a semicircle of Tessiemen. They had spears. They had exquisitely chipped obsidian spearheads, which, like their swords, were nowhere near as sophisticated as ordinary, coarse, inferior steel weapons. "'Was it better to know that you were going to be skewered by delicate examples of genuine ethnic origin rather than nasty forge-made items hammered out by people not in contact with the cycles of nature?' "'Probably not,' Rincewind decided. "'I always say,' said de Quirme, "'that there is a good side to everything.' Rincewind