that Duke Fasenego was to materialize unto him and offer him forbidden pleasures and dark delights to bend him to our will!" The king growled. The problem with being evil, he had been forced to admit, was that demons were not great innovatory thinkers and really needed the spice of human ingenuity, and he had really been looking forward to Eric Thursley, whose brand of superintelligent gormlessness was a rare delight. Hell needed horribly bright, self-centered people like Eric. They were much better at being nasty than demons could ever manage. "'Indeed, lord,' said the demon, "'and the duke has been awaiting the summons there for years, shunning all other temptations, steadfastly and patiently studying the world of men. So where was he?' "'Er, call of supernature, lord,' the demon gaveled, hadn't turned his back for two minutes again. "'And someone went through?' "'We're trying to find out.' Lord Astophagal's patience, which in any case had the tensile strength of putty, snapped at this point. That just about summed it up. He had the kind of subjects who used the words find out when they meant ascertain. Damnation was too good for them. "'Get out!' he whispered. "'And I shall see to it that you get a commendation for this!' "'Oh, master, I plead, get out!' The king stamped along the glowing corridors to his private apartments. His predecessors had favoured shaggy hind legs and hooves. Lord Astophagal had rejected all that sort of thing out of hand. He held that no one would ever get taken seriously by those stuck-up bastards in Dunmanifesting when their rear end kept ruminating all the time, and so he favoured a red silk cloak, crimson tights, a cowl with two rather sophisticated little horns on it, and a trident. The end kept dropping off the trident, but, he felt, it was the sort of get-up in which a demon king could be taken seriously. In the coolness of his chambers—oh, by all the gods, or, rather, not by all the gods, it had taken him ages to get them up to some sort of civilized standard—his predecessors had been quite content just to lounge around and tempt people. He had never heard of executive stress. He gently lifted the cover of the Mirror of Souls and watched it flicker into life. Its cool, black surface was surrounded by an ornate frame from which curls of greasy smoke constantly unfolded and drifted. "'Your wish, master,' it said. "'Show me the events around the pseudopolis gate over the last hour,' said the king, and settled down to watch. After a while he went and looked up the name Rincewind in the filing-cabinet he had recently had installed in place of the distressingly bound old ledgers that had been there. The system still needed ironing out, though, because the bewildered demons filed everything under P for people. Then he sat watching the flickering pictures and absentmindedly playing with the stuff on his desk to soothe his nerves. He had any amount of desk-things—note-pads with magnets for paper-clips, handy devices for holding pens, and those tiny jotters that always come in handy—incredibly funny statuettes with slogans like, "'You're the boss!' and little chromium balls, and spirals operated by a sort of ersatz and short-lived perpetual motion. No one looking at that desk could have any doubt that they were, in cold fact, truly damned.' "'I see,' said Lord Astophagal, setting a selection of shiny balls swinging with one tap of a talon. He couldn't remember any demon called Rynthswind. On the other hand, there were millions of the wretched things swarming all over the place with no sense of order, and he hadn't yet had time to carry out a proper census and retire the unnecessary ones. This one seemed to have fewer appendages and more vowels in its name than most, but it had to be a demon. Vasanago was a proud old fool, one of the elder demons who smiled, and despised him and not quite obeyed him, just because the King had worked hard over the millennia to get from humble beginnings to where he was to-day. He wouldn't put it past the old devil to do this on purpose, just to spite him. Well, he'd have to see about that later—send him a memo or something. Too late to do anything about it now. He'd have to take a personal interest. Eric Thursley was too good a prospect to pass up. Hating Eric Thursley would really annoy the gods. Gods! How he hated the gods! He hated the gods even more than he hated the old guard like Vasanago, even more than he hated humans. He'd thrown a little soiree last week. He'd put a lot of thought into it. He wanted to show that he was prepared to let bygones be bygones, work with them for a new, better, and more efficient universe. He'd call it a getting-to-know-you party. There'd been sausages on sticks and everything. He'd done his best to make it nice. They hadn't even bothered to answer the invitations. And he'd made a special point of putting R.S.V.P. on them. "'Day, man!' Eric peered around the door. "'What shape are you?' he said. "'Pretty poor shape,' said Rincewind. "'I've brought you some food. You don't eat, do you?' Rincewind tried some. It was a bowl of cereal, nuts, and dried fruit. He didn't have a quarrel with any of that. It was just that somewhere in the preparation something had apparently been done to these innocent ingredients, what it takes a million gravities to do to a neutron star. If you died of eating this sort of thing, they wouldn't have to bury you, they would just need to drop you somewhere where the ground was soft.' He managed to swallow it. It wasn't difficult. The trick would have been preventing it from heading downwards. "'Lovely!' he choked. Shortled Parrot did a splendid impersonation of someone being sick. "'I've decided to let you go,' said Eric. "'It's pretty pointless keeping you, isn't it?' 'Absolutely.' "'You don't have any powers at all?' "'Sorry. Dead failure.' "'You don't look too demonic, come to think of it,' said Eric. "'They never do. You can't trust them. What's names?' Shortled the Parrot. It lost its balance again. "'Polly want a biscuit,' it said, upside down. Rincewind spun round. "'You stay out of this, beaky!' There was a sound behind them, like the universe clearing its throat. The chalk marks of the magic circle grew terribly bright for a moment, became fiery lines against the scuffed planks, and something dropped out of the empty air and landed heavily on the floor. It was a large, metal-bound chest. It had fallen on its curved lid. After a while it started to rock violently, then it extended hundreds of little pink legs and with considerable effort flipped itself over. Finally it shuffled around until it was watching the pair of them. It was all the more disconcerting because it was staring without having any eyes to do it with. Eric moved first. He grasped the homemade magic sword, which flapped wildly. "'You are a daemon,' he said. "'I nearly believed you when you said you weren't!' "'Whee!' said the Parrot. "'It's just my luggage,' said Rincewind desperately, to sort of—'Well, it goes everywhere with me. There's nothing demonic about it. Erm—' He hesitated. "'Not much, anyway,' he finished lamely. "'Avaunt!' "'Oh, not again!' The boy looked at the open book. "'Marcomann's earlier resume,' he said firmly. "'The most beautiful woman who has ever lived. Mastery of all the kingdoms of the world, and to live for ever. Get on with it!' Rincewind stood frozen. "'Well, go on,' said Eric. 'You're supposed to disappear in a puff of smoke.' "'Listen, do you think I can just snap my fingers?' Rincewind snapped his fingers. There was a puff of smoke. Rincewind gave his fingers a long, shocked stare, as one might regard a gun that had been hanging on the wall for decades, and had suddenly gone off and perforated the cat. "'They've hardly ever done that before,' he said. He looked down. "'Bah!' he said, and closed his eyes. It was a better world in the darkness behind his eyelids. If he tapped his foot he could persuade himself that he could feel the floor. He could know that he was really standing in the room, and that the urgent signals from all his other senses, which were telling him that he was suspended in the air some thousand miles or so above the disk, were just a bad dream he'd wake up from. He hastily cancelled that thought. If he was asleep he'd prefer to stay that way. You could fly in dreams. If he woke up it was a long way to fall.' "'Perhaps I have died, and I really am a demon,' he thought. It was an interesting point.' He opened his eyes again. "'Wow!' said Eric, his eyes gleaming. "'Can I have all of it?' The boy was standing in the same position as he had been in the room. So was the luggage. So, to Rincewind's annoyance, was the parrot. It was perching in mid-air, looking speculatively at the cosmic panorama below. The disk might almost have been designed to be seen from space. It hadn't, Rincewind was damn sure, been designed to be lived on. But he had to admit it was impressive. The sun was about to rise on the far rim, and made a line of fire that glittered around half the circumference. A long, slow dawn was just beginning its sweep across the dark, massive landscape. Below, harshly lit in the arid vacuum of space, Great Atuin the world-turtle toiled under the weight of creation. On his—or her, the matter had never really been resolved—Carapace, the four giant elephants strained to support the disk itself. There might have been more efficient ways to build a world. You might start with a ball of molten iron, and then coat it with successive layers of rock, like an old-fashioned gobstopper. And you'd have a very efficient planet. But it wouldn't look so nice. Besides, things would drop off the bottom. "'Pretty good,' said the parrot. "'Polly want a continent?' "'It's so big,' wheezed Eric. "'Yes,' said Rincewind flatly. He felt that something more was expected of him. "'Don't break it,' he added. He had a nagging doubt about all this. If he was, for the sake of argument, a demon, and so many things had happened to him recently that he was prepared to concede that he might have died and not noticed it in the confusion— Rincewind had been told that death was just like going into another room. The difference is, when you shout, "'Where's my clean socks?' no one answers. If he'd died and not noticed it in the confusion, then he still didn't quite see how the world was his to give away. He was pretty sure that it had owners who felt the same way. Also, he was sure that a demon had to get something in writing. "'I think you have to sign for it,' he said. "'In blood?' "'Pose,' said Eric. "'Yours, I think,' said Rincewind. "'Or bird-blood will do it a pinch,' he glared meaningfully at the parrot, which growled at him. "'Aren't I allowed to try it out first?' "'What?' "'Well, supposing it doesn't work. I'm not signing for it until I've seen it work. Rincewind stared at the boy. Then he looked down at the broad panorama of the kingdoms of the world. "'I wonder if I was like him at his age,' he thought. "'I wonder how I survived.' "'It's the world,' he said patiently. "'Of course it will bloody well work. I mean, look at it. Hurricanes, continental drift, rainfall cycle—it's all there, all ticking over like a bloody watch. It'll last you a lifetime, a world like that,' he used carefully. Eric gave the world a critical examination. He wore the expression of someone who knows that all the best gifts in life seem to require the psychic equivalent of two U-2 batteries, and the shops won't be open until after the holidays. "'There's got to be tribute,' he said flatly. "'You what?' "'The kings of the world,' said Eric. ''They've got to pay me tribute.' "'You've really been studying this, haven't you?' said Rincewind sarcastically. "'Just tribute? You don't fancy the moon while we're up here? This week's special offer—one free satellite with every world dominated. Are there any useful minerals? What?'' Eric gave a sigh of long-suffering patience. "'Minerals,' he said. "'Ores, you know.' Rincewind coloured. "'I don't think a lad your age should be thinking of—' "'I mean metal and things. It's no use to me if it's just a load of rock.' Rincewind looked down. The Discworld's tiny moonlet was just rising over the far edge, and shed a pale radiance across the jigsaw pattern of land and sea. "'Oh, I don't know. It looks quite nice,' he volunteered. "'Look, it's dark now. Perhaps everyone can pay you tribute in the morning. I'll want some tribute now.' "'I thought you might.' Rincewind gave his fingers a careful examination. It wasn't as if he'd ever been particularly good at snapping them. He gave it another try. When he opened his eyes again, he was standing up to his ankles in mud. Pre-eminent amongst Rincewind's talents was his skill in running away, which over the years he had elevated to the status of a genuinely pure science. "'It didn't matter if you were fleeing from, or to, so long as you were fleeing. It was flight alone that counted. I run, therefore I am. More correctly, I run, therefore, with any luck, I'll still be.' But he was also skilled in languages and in practical geography. He could shout, "'Help!' in fourteen languages, and scream for mercy in a further twelve. He had passed through many of the countries on the Disc, some of them at high speed, and during the long, lovely, boring hours when he'd worked in the Library, he'd whiled away the time by reading up on all the exotic and faraway places he'd never visited. He remembered that at the time he'd sighed with relief that he'd never have to visit them. And now here he was. Jungle surrounded him. It wasn't nice, interesting, open jungle, such as leopard-skin-clad heroes might swing through, but serious real jungle, jungle that towered up like solid slabs of greenness, thorned and barbed, jungle in which every representative of the vegetable kingdom had really rolled up its bark and got down to the strenuous business of outgrowing all competitors. The soil was hardly soil at all, but dead plants on the way to compost-hood. Water dripped from leaf to leaf, insects whined in the humid, spore-laden air, and there was the terrible, breathless silence made by the motors of photosynthesis running flat out. Any yodelling hero who'd tried to swing through that lot might just as well take his chances with a bean-slicer. "'How do you do that?' said Eric. "'It's probably a knack,' said Rincewind. Eric subjected the wonders of nature to a cursory and disdainful glance. "'This doesn't look like a kingdom,' he complained. "'You said we could go to a kingdom. Do you call this a kingdom?' "'This is probably the rain-forests of Clatch,' said Rincewind. "'They're stuffed full of lost kingdoms.' "'You mean mysterious ancient races of Amazonian princesses, who subject all male prisoners to strange and exhaustive progenitative rites?' said Eric, his glasses beginning to fog. "'Ha! ha!' said Rincewind stonily. "'What an imagination a child has!' "'Bostame! bostame! bostame!' shrieked the parrot. "'I've read all about them,' said Eric, peering into the greenery. "'Of course, I own those kingdoms as well.' He stared at some private inner vision. "'Gosh!' he said hungrily. "'I should concentrate on the tribute, if I was you,' said Rincewind, setting off down what was possibly a path. The brightly coloured blooms on a tree nearby turned to watch him go. "'In the jungles of central Clatch there are, indeed, lost kingdoms of mysterious Amazonian princesses, who capture male explorers for specifically masculine duties. These are, indeed, rigorous and exhausting, and the luckless victims do not last long. This is because wiring plugs, putting up shelves, sorting out the funny noise in the attics, and mowing lawns can eventually reduce even the strongest constitution. There are also hidden plateau, where the reptilian monsters of a bygone epoch romp and play, as well as elephants' graveyards, lost diamond mines, and strange ruins decorated with hieroglyphs, the very sight of which can freeze the most valiant heart. On any reasonable map of the area there's barely room for the trees. The few explorers who have returned have passed on a number of handy hints to those who follow after, such as 1. Avoid, if possible, any hanging-down creepers with beady eyes and a forked tongue at one end. 2. Don't pick up any orange-and-black striped creepers that are apparently lying across the path twitching, because there is often a tiger on the other end. And 3. Don't go. If I'm a demon, Rincewind thought hazily, why is everything stinging me and trying to trip me up? I mean, surely I can only be harmed by a wooden dagger through my heart. Or do I mean garlic? Eventually the jungle opened out into a very wide, cleared area that stretched all the way to a distant blue range of volcanoes. The land fell away below them to a patchwork of lakes and swampy fields, here and there punctuated by great stepped pyramids, each one crowned with a thin plume of smoke curling into the dawn air. The jungle track opened out into a narrow but paved road. Where's this, daemon? said Eric. It looks like one of the Tesuman kingdoms, said Rincewind. They're ruled over by the great Mazuma, I think. She's an Amazonian princess, is she? Strangely enough, no. You'd be astonished how many kingdoms aren't ruled by Amazonian princesses, Eric. It looks pretty primitive, anyway. A bit Stone Age. The Tesuman priests have a sophisticated calendar and an advanced horology, quoted Rincewind. Oh, said Eric. Good. No, said Rincewind patiently. It means time-measurement. Oh. You'd approve of them. They're superb mathematicians, apparently. Ha! said Eric, blinking solemnly. Shouldn't think they've got a lot to count in a backward civilization like this. Rincewind eyed the chariots that were heading rapidly towards them. I think they usually count victims, he said. The Tesuman Empire in the jungle valleys of central Clach is known for its organic market gardens, its exquisite craftsmanship in obsidian, feathers and jade, and its mass human sacrifices in honour of Quez-Ova-Coatl, the feathered boar, god of mass human sacrifices. As they said, you always knew where you stood with Quez-Ova-Coatl. It was generally with a lot of people, on top of a great stepped pyramid, with someone in an elegant feathered headdress, chipping an exquisite obsidian knife for your very own personal use. The Tesuman are renowned on the continent for being the most suicidally gloomy, irritable and pessimistic people you could ever hope to meet, for reasons that may soon be made clear. It was true about the time measurement as well. The Tesuman had realised long ago that everything was getting steadily worse, and, having a terrible literal-mindedness, had developed a complex system to keep track of how much worse each succeeding day was. Contrary to general belief, the Tesuman did invent the wheel. They just had radically different ideas about what you used it for. It was the first chariot Rincewind had ever seen that was pulled by llamas. That wasn't what was odd about it. What was odd about it was that it was being carried by people, two holding each side of the axle, and running after the animals, their sandalled feet flapping on the flagstones. Do you think it's got the tribute in it?