at the end of time. Death waited. After a while, his skeletal fingers began to drum on the handle of his scythe. Darkness lapped around him. There wasn't even any infinity any more. He attempted to whistle a few snatches of unpopular songs between his teeth, but the sound was simply sucked into nothingness. Forever was over. All the sands had fallen. The great race between entropy and energy had been run, and the favourite had been the winner after all. Perhaps he ought to sharpen the blade again. Nah. Not much point, really. Great rolls of absolutely nothing stretched into what would have been called the distance, if there had been a space-time reference frame to give words like distance any sensible meaning There didn't seem to be much to do. Perhaps it's time to call it a day, he thought. Death turned to go, but, just as he did so, he heard the faintest of noises. It was, to sound what one photon is to light, so weak and feeble that it would have passed entirely unheard in the din of an operating universe. It was a tiny piece of matter popping into existence. Death stalked over to the point of arrival and watched carefully. It was a paperclip. Many people think it should have been a hydrogen molecule, but this is against the observed facts. Everyone who has found a hitherto unknown egg-whisk jamming an innocent kitchen drawer knows that raw matter is continually flowing into the universe in fairly developed forms, popping into existence normally in ashtrays, vases, and glove compartments. It chooses its shape to allay suspicion, and common manifestations are paperclips, the pins out of shirt packaging, the little keys for central heating radiators, marbles, bits of crayon, mysterious sections of herb-chopping devices, and old Kate Bush albums. Why matter does this is unclear, but it is evidence that matter has plans. It is also apparent that creators sometimes favour the Big Bang method of universe construction, and at other times use the more gentle methods of continuous creation. This follows studies by cosmotherapists which have revealed that the violence of the Big Bang can give a universe serious psychological problems when it gets older. A paperclip. Well, it was a start. There was another pop, which left a small white shirt-button spinning gently in the vacuum. Death relaxed a little. Of course it was going to take some time. There was going to be an interlude before all this got complicated enough to produce gas-clouds, galaxies, planets, and continents, let alone tiny corkscrew-shaped things wiggling around in slimy pools and wondering whether evolution was worth all the bother of growing fins and legs and things. But it indicated the start of an unstoppable trend. All he had to do was be patient, and he was good at that. Pretty soon there'd be living creatures, developing like mad, running and laughing in the new sunlight, growing tired, growing old. Death sat back. He could wait. Whenever they needed him, he'd be there. The universe came into being. Any created-again cosmogonist will tell you that all the interesting stuff happened in the first couple of minutes, when nothingness bunched together to form space and time, and lots of really tiny black holes appeared and so on. After that, they say, it became just a matter of, well, matter. It was basically all over bar the microwave radiation. Seen from close by, though, it had a certain gaudy attraction. The little man sniffed. Too showy, he said. You don't need all that noise. It could just as easily have been a big hiss or a bit of music. Could it? said Rincewind. Yeah, and it looked pretty iffy around a two picosecond mark. Definitely a bit of ropey filling in. But that's how it goes these days. No craftsmanship. When I was a lad, it took days to make a universe. You could take a bit of pride in it. Now they just throw it together and it's back on a lorry and away. And you know what? No, said Rincewind weakly. They pinch his stuff off the site. They find someone nearby who wants to expand their universe a bit. Next thing you know, they've had it away with a bunch of firmament and flogged it for an extension somewhere. Rincewind stared at him. Who are you? The man took the pencil from behind his ear and looked reflectively at the space around Rincewind. He makes things, he said. What sort of things? What sort of things would you like? You're the creator? The little man looked very embarrassed. Not the, not the, just a. I don't contract for the big stuff, the stars, the gas giants, the pulsars, and so on. I just specialize in what you might call the bespoke trade. He gave them a look of defiant pride. I do all my own trees, you know, he confided. Craftsmanship. Takes years to learn how to make a tree, even the conifers. Oh, said Rincewind. I don't get someone in to finish them off. No subcontracting, that's my motto. The buggers always keep you hanging about while they're installing stars or something for someone else. The little man sighed. You know, people think it must all be very easy, Creighton. They think you just have to move on the face of the waters and wave your hands a bit. It's not like that at all. It isn't? The little man scratched his nose again. You soon run out of ideas for snowflakes, for example. Oh? You start thinking it'd be a doddle to sneak in a few identical ones. You do? You think to yourself, there's a billion trillion squillion of them, no one's going to notice. But that's where professionalism comes in, sort of thing. It does? Some people, and here the creator looked sharply at the unformed matter still streaming past, think it's enough to install a few basic physical formulas and then take the money and run. A billion years later you've got leaks all over the sky, black holes the size of your head, and when you pray up to complain there's just a girl on the counter who says she don't know where the boss is. I think people appreciate the personal touch, don't you? Ah, said Rincewind, so when people get struck by lightning, um, it's not just because of all that stuff about electrical discharges and high points and everything, um, you actually mean it. No, not me. I don't run the things. It's a big enough job just building them. You can't expect me to operate them as well. There is a load of other universes, you know, he added, a slight note of accusation in his voice. Got a list of jobs as long as you are um. He reached underneath him and produced a large leather-bound book, which he had apparently been sitting on. It opened with a creak. Rincewind felt a tugging at his robe. Look, said Eric, this isn't really Hame, is it? He says it is, said Rincewind. What are we doing here? I don't know. The creator glared at him. A little quiet there, please, he said. But listen, hissed Eric, if he really is the creator of the world, that sandwich is a religious relic. Gosh, said Rincewind weakly, he hadn't eaten for ages. He wondered what the penalty was for eating a venerated object. It was probably severe. You could put it in a temple somewhere, and billions of people would come to look at it. Rincewind cautiously levered up the top slice of bread. It's got no mayonnaise in it, he said. Will that still count? The creator cleared his throat and began to read aloud. Astvigal surfed across the entropy slope, an angry red spark against the swirls of interspace. He was so angry now that the last vestiges of self-control were slipping away. His jaunty cap with its stylish hornlets had become a mere wisp of crimson dangling from the tip of one of the great coiled ram's horns that framed his skull. With a rather sensuous ripping noise, the red silk across his back tore open and his wings unfolded. They are conventionally represented as leathery, but leather wouldn't survive more than a few seconds in that environment. Besides, it doesn't fold up very well. These wings were made of magnetism and shaped space, and spread out until they were a faint curtain against the incandescent firmament, and they beat as slowly and inexorably as the rise of civilizations. They still looked bat-like, but that was just for the sake of tradition. Somewhere around the 29th millennium he was overtaken, quite without noticing, by something small and oblong, and probably even angrier than he was. Eight spells go to make up the world. Rincewind knew that well enough. He knew that the book which contained them was the Octavo, because it still existed in the library of Unseen University, currently inside a welded iron box at the bottom of a specially dug shaft where its magical radiations can be kept under control. Rincewind had wondered how it had all started. He imagined a sort of explosion in reverse, with interstellar gases roaring together to form great Atuin, or at least a roll of thunder, or something. Instead, there was a faint musical twang, and where the Discworld hadn't been, there the Discworld was, as if it had been hiding somewhere the whole time. He also realized that the feeling of falling he had so recently learned to live with was one he was probably going to die with too. As the world appeared beneath him, it brought this aeon's special offer, gravity, available in a choice of strengths from your nearest massive planetary body. He said, as so often happens on these occasions, BAAA! The Creator, still sitting serenely in mid-air, appeared beside him as he plummeted. Nice clouds, don't you think? Done a good job on the clouds, he said. BAAA! Rincewind repeated. Something the matter? BAAAA! That's humans for you, said the Creator, always rushing off somewhere. He leaned closer. It's not up to me, of course, but I've often wondered what it is that goes through your heads. It's going to be my feet in a minute, screamed Rincewind. Eric, falling alongside him, tugged at his ankle. That's not the way to talk to the Creator of the universe, he shouted. Just tell him to do something, make the ground soft or something. Oh, I don't know if I could do that, said the Creator. It's causality regulations. I'd have the Inspector down on me like a ton of—a ton of—a ton of weight, he added. I could probably knock you up a really spongy bog. Or quicksand's very popular at the moment. I could do you a complete quicksand with marsh and swamp, en suite, no problem. BAAA! said Rincewind. You're going to have to speak up a bit. I'm sorry. Wait a moment. There was another harmonious twanging noise. When Rincewind opened his eyes, he was standing on a beach. So was Eric. The Creator floated nearby. There was no rushing wind. He hadn't got so much as a bruise. I just wedged a thingy in the velocities and positions, said the Creator, noticing his expression. Now, what was it you were saying? I rather wanted to stop plunging to my death, said Rincewind. Oh, good. Well, glad that's sorted out, then. The Creator looked around distractedly. You haven't seen my book around, have you? I thought I had it in my hand when I started. He sighed. Lose me own head next. I'd done a whole world once and completely left out the fingles. Not one of the buggers. Couldn't get them at the time. Told myself I could nip back when I was in stock. Completely forgot. Imagine that. No one spotted it, of course, because, obviously, they'd just evolved there, and they didn't know there ought to be fingles. But it was definitely causing them deep, you know, psychological problems. Deep down inside, they could tell there was something missing, sort of thing. The Creator pulled himself together. Anyway, I can't hang about all day, he said. Like I said, I got a lot of jobs on. Lots, said Eric. I thought there was only one. Oh, no, there's masses of them, said the Creator, beginning to fade away. That's quantum mechanics for you, see. You don't do it once and have done. No, they keep on branching off. Multiple choice, they call it. It's like painting the, er, painting the, er, painting something very big that you have to keep on painting, sort of thing. It's all very well saying you just have to change one little detail, but which one? That's the real bugger. Well, nice to have met you. If you need any extra work, you know, an extra moon or something— Hey! The Creator reappeared, his eyebrows raised in polite surprise. What happens now? said Rincewind. Now? Well, I imagine there'll be some gods along soon. They don't wait long to move in, you know, like flies round a, um, flies round a, er, well, like flies. They tend to be a bit high-spirited to start with, but they soon settle down. I suppose they take care of all the people, etc. The Creator leaned forward. I've never been any good at doing people, never seem to get the arms and legs right. He vanished. They waited. I think he's really gone this time, said Eric, after a while. What a nice man. You certainly understand a lot more about why the world is like it is after talking to him, said Rincewind. What are quantum mechanics? I don't know. People who repair quantums, I suppose. Rincewind looked at the egg-and-cress sandwich still in his hand. There was still no mayonnaise in it, and the bread was soggy. But it would be thousands of years before there was another one. There had to be the dawn of agriculture, the domestication of animals, the evolution of the bread knife from its primitive flint ancestry, the development of dairy technology, and, if there was any desire to make a proper job of it, the cultivation of olive trees, pepper plants, salt pans, vinegar fermentation processes, and the techniques of elementary food chemistry, before the world would see another one like it. It was unique, a little white triangle full of anachronisms, lost and all alone in an unfriendly world. He bit it anyway. It wasn't very nice. What I don't understand, said Eric, is why we are here. I take it that isn't a philosophical question, said Rincewind. I take it you mean, why are we here at the dawn of creation on this beach which has hardly been used? Yes, that's what I meant. Rincewind sat down on a rock and sighed. I think it's pretty obvious, isn't it? he said. You wanted to live forever. I didn't say anything about travelling in time, said Eric. I was very clear about it, so there'd be no tricks. There isn't a trick. The wish is trying to be helpful. I mean, it's pretty obvious when you think about it. Forever means the entire span of space and time. Forever. For. Ever. See? You mean you have to sort of start at square one? Precisely. But that's no good. It's going to be years before there's anyone else around. Centuries, corrected Rincewind gloomily. Millennia. Eons. And then there's going to be all kinds of wars and monsters and stuff. Most of history is pretty appalling when you look hard at it. Or even not very hard. But what I meant was I just wanted to go on living forever from now, said Eric frantically. I mean, from then. I mean, look at this place. No girls. No people. Nothing to do on Saturday nights. It won't even have any Saturday nights for thousands of years, said Rincewind. Just nights. You must take me back at once, said Eric. I order it. Avant. You say that one more time and I will give you a thick ear, said Rincewind. But all you have to do is snap your fingers. It won't work. You've had your three wishes. Sorry. What shall I do? Well, if you see anything crawl out of the sea and try to breathe, you could try telling it not to bother. You think this is funny, don't you? It is rather amusing since you mention it, said Rincewind, his face expressionless. The joke's going to be wearing pretty thin over the years, then, said Eric. What? Well, you're not going to go anywhere, are you? You'll have to stay with me. Nonsense. I'll... Rincewind looked around desperately. I'll what, he thought. The waves rolled peacefully up the beach, not very strongly at the moment because they were still feeling their way. The first high tide was coming in cautiously. There was no tide line, just a streaky line of old seaweed and shells to give it some idea of what was expected of it. The air had the clean, fresh smell of air that has yet to know the effusions of a forest floor or the ins and outs of a ruminant digestive system. Rincewind had grown up in Ankh-Morpork. He liked air that had been around a bit, had got to know people, had been lived in. We've got to get back, he said urgently. That's what I've been saying, said Eric with a strained patience. Rincewind took another bite of the sandwich. He'd looked Death in the face many times, or, more precisely, Death had looked him in the back of his rapidly retreating head many times, and suddenly the prospect of living for ever did not appeal. There were, of course, great questions he might learn the answer to, such as how life evolved and all the rest of it, but looked at as a way of spending all your spare time for the next infinity. It wasn't a patch on a quiet evening strolling through the streets of Ankh. Still, he'd acquired an ancestor. That was something. Not everyone had an ancestor. What would his ancestor have done in a situation like this? He wouldn't have been here. Well, yes, of course, but apart from that he would have... he would have used his fine military mind to consider the tools available. That's what he would have done. He had item. One half-eaten egg-and-cress sandwich. No help there. He threw it away. He had item himself. He drew a tick in the sand. He wasn't certain what use he could be, but he could come back to that later. He had item. Eric. Thirteen-year-old demonologist and acne-attack grand zero. That seemed to be about it. He stared at the clean, fresh sand for a while, doodling in it. Then he said quietly, Eric, come here a moment. The waves were a lot stronger now. They had really got the hang of the tide thing and were venturing a little ebb and flow. Astvigl materialized in a puff of blue smoke. Aha! he said, but this fell rather flat because there was no one to hear it. He looked down. There were footprints in the sand, hundreds of them. They ran backwards and forwards as if something had been frantically searching and then vanished. He leaned nearer. It was hard to make out what with all the footprints and the effects of the wind and the tide, but just on the edge of the encroaching surf were the unmistakable signs of a magic circle. Astvigl said a swear word that fused the sand around him into glass and vanished. The tide got on with things. Further down the beach the last surge poured into a hollow in the rocks, and the new sun beamed down on the soaking remains of a half-eaten egg-and-crest sandwich. Tidal action turned it over. Thousands of bacteria suddenly found themselves in the midst of a taste explosion and started to breed like mad. If only there had been some mayonnaise, life might have turned out a whole lot different, more piquant, and perhaps with a little extra cream in it. Travelling by magic always had major drawbacks. There was the feeling that your stomach was lagging behind, and your mind filled up with terror because the destination was always a little uncertain. It wasn't that you could come out anywhere.