NOBLESSE OBLIGEE." "'Noblesse obligée,' corrected Colin. Yeah, means you've got to keep your end up in society, giving money to charities, being kind to the poor, passing your old clothes to your gardener when there's still some good wear left in them. I know about that, my uncle was butler to old Lady Selachie." "'Ain't got a gardener,' said Nobby, gloomily. "'Ain't got a garden, ain't got any old clothes except what I'm wearing.' He took another swig. "'She gave her old clothes to the gardener, did she?' Colin nodded. "'Yeah. We were always a bit puzzled about that gardener.' He caught the barman's eye. Two more pints of winkles were on. He glanced at Nobby. His old friend looked more dejected than he'd ever seen him. "'They'd have to see this thing through together. Better make that two for Nobby, too,' he added. "'Cheers, Fred.' Sergeant Colin's eyebrows raised as one pint was emptied almost in one go. Nobby put the mug down, a little unsteadily. "'Wouldn't be so bad if there was a pot of cash,' Nobby said, picking up the other mug. "'I thought you couldn't be a knob without being a rich bugger. I thought they gave you a big wad with one hand and banged the crown on your head with the other. Don't make sense, being knobby and poor. Swirst of both worlds!' he drained the mug and banged it down. "'Common and rich, yeah, that I could herbal,' the barman leaned over to Sergeant Colin. "'What's up with the corporal? He's a half-pint man. That's eight pints he's had.' Fred Colin leaned closer and spoke out of the corner of his mouth. "'Keep it to yourself, Ron. But it's because he's a peer.' "'Is that a fact? I'll go and put down some fresh sawdust.' In the watch-house Sam Vimes prodded the matches. He didn't ask Angua if she was sure. Angua could smell if it was Wednesday. "'So who were the others?' he said. "'Other golems?' "'It's hard to tell from the tracks,' said Angua, "'but I think so. I'd have followed them, but I thought I ought to come right back here.' "'What makes you think they were golems?' "'The footprints. And golems have no smell,' she said. ''They pick up the smells associated with whatever they're doing. That's all they smell of.' She thought of the wall of words. "'And they had a long debate,' she said. "'A golem argument. In writing. It got pretty heated, I think.' She thought about the wall again. "'Some of them got quite emphatic,' she added, remembering the size of some of the lettering. "'If they were human, they'd have been shouting.' Vimes stared gloomily at the matches laid out before him, eleven bits of wood and a twelfth broken in two. "'You didn't need to be any kind of genius to see what had been going on. "'They drew lots,' he said, "'and Dawful lost.' He sighed. "'This is getting worse,' he said. "'Does anyone know how many golems there are in the city?' "'No,' said Carrot. ''Hard to find out. No one's made any for centuries, but they don't wear out.' "'No one makes them. It's banned, sir. The priests are pretty hot on that, sir. They say it's making life, and that's something only gods are supposed to do. But they put up with the ones that are still around, because, well, they're so useful. Some are walled up, or in treadmills, or at the bottom of shafts, doing messy tasks, you know, in places where it's dangerous to go. They do all the really mucky jobs. I suppose there could be hundreds.' "'Hundreds,' said Vimes. "'And now they meet secretly and make plots. Good grief! Right. We ought to destroy the lot of them.' "'Why? You like the idea of them having secrets?' "'I mean, good grief! Trolls and dwarfs are fine. Even the undead are alive in a way, even if it is a bloody awful way.' Vimes caught Angua's eye and went on. "'For the most part. But these things, they're just things that do work. It's like having a bunch of shovels meeting for a chat.' "'Er, there was something else, sir,' said Angua slowly, in the cellar. "'Yes, erm, but it's hard to explain. It was a feeling.' Vimes shrugged noncommittally. She'd learned not to scoff at Angua's feelings. She always knew where Carrot was, for one thing. If she were in the watch-house, you could tell if he were coming up the street by the way she turned to look at the door. "'Yes? Like—' "'Deep grief, sir. Terrible, terrible sadness.' "'Erm—' Vimes nodded and pinched the bridge of his nose. It seemed to have been a long day, and it was far from over yet. He really, really needed a drink. The world was distorted enough as it was. When you saw it through the bottom of a glass, it all came back into focus. "'Have you had anything to eat today, sir?' said Angua. "'I had a bit of breakfast,' muttered Vimes. "'You know that word Sergeant Colan uses?' "'What, manky?' "'That's how you look. If you're staying here, at least let's have some coffee and send out for figgins.' Vimes hesitated at that. He'd always imagined that manky was how your mouth felt after three days on a regurgitated diet. "'Is it possible to think that you could look like that?' Angua reached for the old coffee-tin that represented the watch's tea-kitty. It was surprisingly easy to lift. "'Hey, there should be at least twenty-five dollars in here,' she said. Nobby collected it only yesterday.' She turned the tin upside down. A very small dog-end dropped out. "'Not even an I.O.U.' said Carrot despondently. "'An I.O.U.? This is Nobby we're talking about.' "'Oh, of course.' It had gone very quiet in the Mended Drum. Happy Hour had been passed with no more than a minor fight. Now everyone was watching Unhappy Hour. There was a forest of mugs in front of Nobby. "'I mean, I mean, what's it worth, Wellesendon?' he said. "'You could flog it,' said Ron. "'Good point,' said Sergeant Colan. 'There's plenty of rich folks who'd give a sack of cash for a title. I mean, folks that's already got the big house and that. They'd give anything to be as knobby as you, Nobby.' The ninth pint stopped half-way to Nobby's lips. "'Could be worth thousands of dollars,' said Ron encouragingly. "'At the very least,' said Colan, ''they'd fight over it.' "'You play your cards right and you could retire on something like that,' said Ron. The mug remained stationary. Various expressions fought their way around the lumps and excrescences of Nobby's face, suggesting the terrible battle within. "'Oh, they would, would they?' he said at last. Sergeant Colan tilted unsteadily away. There was an edge in Nobby's voice he hadn't heard before. "'Then you could be rich and common, just like you said,' said Ron, who didn't have quite the same eye for mental weather changes. Posh folks'd be falling over themselves for it. "'Sell my birthright for a spot of massage, is that it?' said Nobby. "'It's a pot of message,' said Sergeant Colan. "'It's a mess of pottage,' said a bystander, anxious not to break the flow. "'Ha! Ha! Well, I'll tell you,' said Nobby, swaying, ''there's some things that can't be sold. Huh? Huh? Who streals my purse streals the tresf, right?' "'Yeah, it's the trashiest-looking purse I ever saw,' said a voice. "'What is a mess of pottage, anyway? "'Cos what good'll a lot of money do me, eh?' The clientele looked puzzled. This seemed to be a question on the lines of, alcohol, is it nice? Or hard work, do you want to do it? "'What's messy about it, then?' "'Well,' said a brave soul, uncertainly, 'you could use it to buy a big house, lots of grub and drink, and women, and that.' "'That's what it takes to make a man happy, is it?' said Nobby, glassy-eyed. His fellow-drinkers just stared. This was a metaphysical maze. "'Well, I'll tell you,' said Nobby, the swaying now so regular that he looked like an inverted pendulum. "'All that stuff's nothing, nothing, I tell you, compared to pride in a man's linen-y-y-y-edge.' "'Linen-y-y-y-edge?' said Sergeant Colon. "'Ancest-es-es-es-esters and that,' said Nobby. "'It means I've got ancestors-es-es-esters and that, which is more than you lot have got.' Sergeant Colon choked on his pint. "'Everyone's got ancestors,' said the barman calmly, "'otherwise they wouldn't be here.' Nobby gave him a glassy stare and tried unsuccessfully to focus. "'Right,' he said, eventually, right, only, only, I've got more of them. "'D'you see, the blood of bloody kings is in these veins, am I right?' "'Temporarily,' said a voice. There was laughter, but it had an anticipatory ring to it that Colon had learned to respect and fear. It reminded him of two things, one, he had got only six weeks to retirement, and two, it had been quite a long time since he'd been to the lavatory. Nobby delved into his pocket and pulled out a battered scroll. "'D'you see this?' he said, unrolling it with difficulty in the bar. "'D'you see it? I've got a right to arm-bears, me. "'If you see me here, it says Earl, right, that's me. "'You could, you could, you could have my head up over the door.' "'Could be,' said the barman, eyeing the crowd. "'I mean, you could change the name of this place, call it the Earl of Honk, and I'd come in and drink here, regular. "'What do you say?' said Nobby. "'News gets around and Earl drinks here, business will go right up, and I wouldn't charge you a penny. "'How about it? People'll say, that's a high-class pub, is that? Lord de Nob's drinks there, that's a place with a bit of tone.' Someone grabbed Nobby by the throat. Colin didn't recognise the grabber. He was just one of the scarred, ill-shaven regulars, whose function it was, around this time of an evening, to start opening bottles with his teeth, or, if the evening was going really well, with someone else's teeth. "'So, we ain't good enough for you, is that what you're saying?' the man demanded. Nobby waved his scroll. His mouth opened to frame words like, Sergeant Colin just knew, "'Unhand me, you low-born oaf!' With tremendous presence of mind, and absence of any kind of common sense, Sergeant Colin said, "'His lordship wants everybody to have a drink with him.' Compared to the mended drum, the bucket in Gleam Street was an oasis of frigid calm. The Watch had adopted it as their own, as a silent temple to the art of getting drunk. It wasn't that it sold particularly good beer, because it didn't, but it did serve it quickly and quietly, and gave credit. It was one place where Watchmen didn't have to see things, or be disturbed. No one could sink alcohol in silence, like a Watchman who'd just come off duty after eight hours on the street. It was as much protection as his helmet and breastplate. The world didn't hurt so much. And Mr. Cheese, the owner, was a good listener. He listened to things like, make that a double, and keep them coming. He also said the right things, like, credit, certainly, officer. Watchmen paid their tab, or got a lecture from Captain Carrot. Vimes sat gloomily behind a glass of lemonade. He wanted one drink, and understood precisely why he wasn't going to have one. One drink ended up arriving in a dozen glasses. But knowing this didn't make it any better. Most of the day-shift were in here now, plus one or two men who were on their day off. Scummy as the place was, he liked it here. With the buzz of other people around him, he didn't seem to get in the way of his own thoughts. One reason that Mr. Cheese had allowed his pub to become practically the city's fifth watch-house was the protection this offered. Watchmen were quiet drinkers on the whole. They just went from vertical to horizontal with the minimum amount of fuss, without starting any major fights, and without damaging the fixtures overmuch. And no one ever tried to rob him. Watchmen got really intense about having their drinking disturbed. And he was therefore surprised when the door was flung open and three men rushed in, flourishing crossbows. "'Don't nobody move! Anyone moves and they're dead!' The robbers stopped at the bar. To their own surprise their arrival didn't seem to have caused much of a stir. "'Oh, for heaven's sake, will someone shut that door?' growled Vimes. A watchman near the door did so. "'And bolt it!' Vimes added. The three thieves looked around. As their eyes grew accustomed to the gloom they received a general impression of amorality, with strong overtones of helmetness. But none of it was moving. It was all watching them. "'You boys new in town?' said Mr. Cheese, buffing a glass. The boldest of the three waved his bow under the barman's nose. "'All the money, right now!' he screamed. "'Otherwise,' he said to the room in general, "'you've got a dead barman!' "'Plenty of other bars in town, boyo,' said a voice. Mr. Cheese didn't look up from the glass he was polishing. "'I know that was you, Constable Thighbiter,' he said calmly. "'There's two dollars and thirty pence on your slate. Thank you very much.' The thieves drew closer together. Bars shouldn't act like this, and they fancied they could hear the faint sliding noises of assorted weapons being drawn from various sheaths. "'Haven't I seen you before?' said Carrot. "'Oh, gods, it's him!' moaned one of the men. "'The bread-thrower!' "'I thought Mr. Ironcrust was taking you to the Thieves' Guild,' Carrot went on. "'There was a bit of an argument about taxes. Don't tell him!' Carrot tapped his head. "'The tax-forms,' he said. "'I expect Mr. Ironcrust is worried I've forgotten about them.' The thieves were now so close together they looked like a fat six-armed man with a very large bill for hats. "'Er, watchmen aren't allowed to kill people, right?' said one of them. "'Not while we're on duty,' said Vimes. The boldest of the three moved suddenly, grabbed Angua, and pulled her upright. "'We walk out of here unharmed or the girl gets it, all right,' he snarled. Someone sniggered. "'I hope you're not going to kill anyone,' said Carrot. "'That's up to us!' "'Sorry? Was I talking to you?' said Carrot. "'Don't worry. I'll be fine,' said Angua. She looked around to make sure Cheery wasn't there, and then sighed. "'Come on, gentlemen, let's get it over with.' "'Don't play with your food,' said a voice from the crowd. There were one or two giggles until Carrot turned in his seat, whereupon everyone was suddenly intensely interested in their drinks. "'It's okay,' said Angua, quietly. Aware that something was out of kilter, but not quite sure what it was, the thieves edged back to the door. No one moved as they unbolted it, and still holding Angua, stepped out into the fog, shutting the door behind them. "'Hadn't we better help?' said a constable, who was new to the watch. "'They don't deserve help,' said Vimes. There was a clank of armour, and then a long, deep growl right outside in the street, and a scream, and then another scream, and a third scream, modulated with "'No! No! No! No! No! Ah! Ah! Ah!' Something heavy hit the door. Vimes turned back to Carrot. "'Mr. Constable Angua,' he said, "'you, er, get along all right?' "'Fine, sir,' said Carrot. "'Some people might think that, er, there might be, er, problems.' There was a thud, and then a faint, bubbling noise. "'We work around them, sir,' said Carrot, raising his voice slightly. "'I heard that her father's not very happy about her working here.' "'They don't have much law up in Ooberwald, sir. They think it's for weak societies. The baron's not a very civic-minded man.' "'He's pretty bloodthirsty, from what I've heard. She wants to stay in the watch, sir. She likes meeting people.' From outside came another gurgle, fingernails scrabbled at a window-pane. Then their owner disappeared abruptly from view. "'Well, it's not for me to judge,' said Vimes. "'No, sir.' After a few moments of silence the door opened slowly. Angua walked in, adjusting her clothes, and sat down. All the watchmen in the room suddenly took a second course of advanced beer-study. "'Er,' Carrot began, "'Flesh wounds,' said Angua. But one of them did shoot one of the others in the leg by accident.' "'I think you'd better put it in your report as self-inflicted wounds while resisting arrest,' said Vimes. "'Yes, sir,' said Angua. "'Not all of them,' said Carrot. "'They tried to rob our bar and take a werewolf, er, Angua, hostage,' said Vimes. "'Oh, I see what you mean, sir,' said Carrot. "'Self-inflicted?' "'Yes, of course.'" It had gone quiet in the mended drum. This was because it is usually very hard to be both loud and unconscious. Sergeant Colon was impressed at his own cleverness. Throwing a punch could stop a fight, of course, but in this case it had a quarter of rum, gin, and sixteen chopped lemons floating in it. Some people were still upright, however. They were the serious drinkers, who drank as if there was no tomorrow, and rather hoped this would be the case. Fred Colon had reached the convivial drunk stage. He turned to the man beside him. "'It's good here, isn't it?' he managed. "'Why am I going to tell my wife? That's what I want to know,' moans the man. "'Do you know, say you've been, been, been working late,' said Colon. "'And suck a peppermint before you goes home. That usually works.'" "'Working late, huh? I've been given the sack, me. The craftsmen. Fifteen years at Spadger and Williams, right? And then they go bust, because of Carrie undercutting them, and I get a job at Carrie's, and bang, I'm out of a job there, too. Surplus requirements. Bloody golems, forcing real people out of a job. What they want to work for, they got no mouth to feed. But the damn thing goes at it so fast, you can't see his bloody arms moving.' "'Shame.' "'Smash him up, that's what I say. I mean, we had a golem at S&W's, but old slob just used to plod along, you know, not buzz away like a blue-arse fly. You want to watch it, mate, they'll have your job next.'" "'Stone-face wouldn't stand for it,' said Colon, undulating gently. "'Any chance of a job with you, like, then?' "'D'you know,' said Colon. The man seems to have become two men. What's it you do?' "'I'm a wick-dipper and end-teaser, mate,' they said. "'I can see that's a useful trade.' "'Here you go, Fred,' said the barman, tapping him on the shoulder and putting a piece of paper in front of him. Colon watched with interest as figures danced back and forth. He tried to focus on the one at the bottom, but it was too big to take in. "'What's this, then?' "'His Imperial Lordship's bar bill,' said the barman. "'Don't be daft, no one can drink that much. I'm not paying.' "'I'm including breakages, mind you.' "'Yeah? Like what?' The barman pulled a heavy hickory stick from its hiding-place under the bar. "'Arms, legs, suit yourself,' he said. "'Oh, come on, Ron, you've known me for years. "'Yes, Fred, you've always been a good customer, so what I'll do is I'll let you shut your eyes first.' "'But that's all the money I've got,' the barman grinned. "'Lucky one for you, eh?' Littlebottom leaned against the corridor wall outside her privy and wheezed. It was something alchemists learned to do early in their career.