pulling themselves up to one another. Where are we, Knobby? I'm sure we left the drum. I've got a sheet over my head. It's the fog, Knobby. What about these legs down here? I reckon them's your legs, Knobby. I've got mine. Right, right. I reckon I've drunk a lot, Sarge. Drunk as a lord, eh?" Knobby reached gingerly up to his helmet. Someone had put a paper coronet around it. His questing hand found a dog-end behind his ear. It was the unpleasant hour of the drinking day when, after a few hours' quality gutter time, you're beginning to feel the retribution of sobriety while still being drunk enough to make it worse. How do we get here, Sarge? Colin started to scratch his head and stopped because of the noise. I reckon, he said, winnowing the frazzled shreds of his short-term memory, I reckon seems to me there was something about storming the palace and demanding your birthright. Knobby choked and spat out the cigarette. We didn't do that, did we? You was shouting we ought to do it. Oh, gods, moaned Knobby, but I reckon you threw up around that time. It's a relief, anyway. Well, it was all over Grabber Hoskins, but he tripped over someone before he could get us. Colin suddenly patted his pockets. And I've still got the tea money, he said, another cloud of memory scuttered across the sunshine of oblivion. Well, three pennies of it. The urgency of this got through to Knobby. Thrapments? Yeah, well, after you'd started ordering all them expensive drinks for the old bar, well, you didn't have no money, and it was either me paying for them, or Colin moved his finger across his throat and went... You telling me we paid for happy hour in the drum? Not so much happy hour, said Colin, miserably, more a sort of ecstatic one hundred and fifty minutes. I didn't even know you could pay gin in paints. Knobby tried to focus on the fog. No one can drink gin by the pint, Sarge. That's what I kept saying. And would you listen? Knobby sniffed. We're close to the river, he said. Let's try to get... Something roared very close by. It was long and low, like a foghorn in serious distress. It was the sound you might hear from a cattle yard on a nervous night, and it went on and on, and then stopped so abruptly it caught the silence unawares. Far away from that as we can, said Knobby. The sound had done the work of an ice-cold shower and about two pints of black coffee. Colin spun round. He desperately needed something that would do the work of a laundry. Where did it come from? he said. It was over there, wasn't it? I thought it was that way. In the fog all directions were the same. I think, said Colin slowly, that we ought to go and make a report about this as soon as possible. Right, said Knobby. Which way? Let's just... run, eh? Constable Downspout's huge pointy ears quivered as the noise boomed over the city. He turned his head carefully, triangulating for height, direction and distance. And then he remembered it. The cry was heard in the watch-house, but muffled by the fog. It entered the open head of the golem doorful and bounced around inside, echoing down, down among the small cracks in the clay, until, at the very edge of perception, little grains danced together. The sightless socket stared at the wall. No one heard the cry that came back from the dead skull, because there was no mouth to utter it, and not even a mind to guide it, but it screamed out into the night. Clay of my clay, Thou shalt not kill, Thou shalt not die. Samuel Vimes dreamed about clues. He had a jaundiced view of clues. He instinctively distrusted them. They got in the way. And he distrusted the kind of person who'd take one look at another man and say in a lordly voice to his companion, Ah, my dear sir, I can tell you nothing except that he is a left-handed stonemason who has spent some years in the merchant navy and has recently fallen on hard times. And then unroll a lot of supercilious commentary about calluses and stance and the state of a man's boots, when exactly the same comments could apply to a man who was wearing his old clothes because he'd been doing a spot of home bricklaying for a new barbecue pit and had been tattooed once when he was drunk and seventeen —these terms are often synonymous— and in fact got seasick on a wet pavement. What arrogance! What an insult to the rich and chaotic variety of the human experience! It was the same with more static evidence. The footprints in the flowerbed were probably, in the real world, left by the window-cleaner. The scream in the night was quite likely a man getting out of bed and stepping sharply on an upturned hairbrush. The real world was far too real to leave neat little hints. It was full of too many things. It wasn't by eliminating the impossible that you got at the truth, however improbable. It was by the much harder process of eliminating the possibilities. You worked away, patiently asking questions and looking hard at things. You walked and talked, and in your heart you just hoped like hell that some bugger's nerve'd crack and he'd give himself up. The events of the day clanged together in Vimes's head. Golems tramped like sad shadows. Father Tubalcheck waved at him and then his head exploded, showering Vimes in words. Mr. Hopkinson lay dead in his own oven, a slice of dwarf bread in his mouth, and the golems marched on silently. There was Dawful dragging its foot, its head open for the words to fly in and out of, like a swarm of bees, and in the middle of it all Arsenic danced, a spiky little green man, crackling and gibbering. At one point he thought one of the golems screamed. After that the dream faded a bit at a time. Golems, oven, words, priest, Dawful, golems marching, the thudding of their feet making the whole dream pulsate. Vimes opened his eyes. Beside him Lady Sybil said, and turned over. Someone was hammering at the front door. Still muzzy, head swimming, Vimes pulled himself up on his elbows and said to the night-time world in general, What sort of a time do you call this? Bingley, bingley, beep, said a cheerful voice from the direction of Vimes's dressing-table. Oh, please. Twenty-nine minutes and thirty-one seconds past five A.M. A penny saved is a penny earned. Would you like me to present your schedule for today? While I am doing this, why not take some time to fill out your registration card? What? What? What are you talking about? The knocking continued. Vimes fell out of bed and groped in the dark for the matches. He finally got a candler-light and half-ran, half-staggered down the long stairs and into the hall. The knocker turned out to be Constable Visit. It's Lord Vetinari, sir. It's worse this time. Has anyone sent for Doughnut Jimmy? Yes, sir. At this time of day the fog was fighting a rear-guard action against the dawn and made the whole world look as though it were inside a ping-pong ball. I poked my head in as soon as I came on shift, and he was out like a light, sir. How did you know he wasn't asleep? On the floor, sir, with all his clothes on. A couple of watchmen had put the patrician on his bed by the time Vimes arrived, slightly out of breath and with his knees aching. Gods, he thought, as he struggled up the stairs, it's not like the old truncheon and bell days. You wouldn't think twice about running half-way across the city, coppers and criminals locked in hot pursuit. With a mixture of pride and shame, he added, and none of the buggers ever caught me either. The patrician was still breathing, but his face was waxy, and he looked as though death might be an improvement. Vimes's gaze roamed the room. There was a familiar haze in the air. Who opened the window? he demanded. I did, sir, said Visit, just before I went to get you. He looked as though he needed some fresh air. It'll be fresher if you left the window shut, said Vimes. Okay, I want everyone, I mean everyone, who was in this place overnight rounded up and down in the hall in two minutes, and someone fetch Corporal Littlebottom and tell Captain Carrot. I'm worried and confused, he thought, so the first rule in the book is to spread it around. He prowled around the room. It didn't take much intelligence to see that Vetinari had got up and moved over to his writing-desk, where, by the look of it, he had worked for some time. The candle had burned right down. An inkwell had been overturned, presumably when he'd slipped off the chair. Vimes dipped a finger in the ink and sniffed it. Then he reached for the quill-pen beside it, hesitated, took out his dagger, and lifted the long feather gingerly. There seemed to be no cunning little barbs on it, but he put it carefully on one side for Littlebottom to examine later. He glanced down at the paper Vetinari had been working on. To his surprise it wasn't writing at all, but a careful drawing. It showed a striding figure, except that the figure was not one person at all, but made up of thousands of smaller figures. The effect was like one of the wicker men built by some of the more outlandish tribes near the Hub, when they annually celebrated the great cycle of nature and their reverence for life by piling as much of it as possible in a great heap and setting fire to it. The composite man was wearing a crown. Vimes pushed the sheet of paper aside and returned his attention to the desk. He brushed the surface carefully for any suspicious splinters. He crouched down and examined the underside. The light was growing outside. Vimes went into both the rooms alongside and made sure their drapes were open, and then went back into Vetinari's room, closed the curtains and the doors, and sidled along the walls looking for any tell-tale speck of light that might indicate a small hole. Where could you stop? Splinters in the floor? Blowpipes through the keyhole? He opened the curtains again. Vetinari had been on the mend yesterday, and now he looked worse. Someone had got to him in the night. How? Slow poison was the devil of a thing. You had to find a way of giving it to the victim every day. No, you didn't. What was elegant was finding a way of getting him to administer it to himself every day. Vimes rummaged through the paperwork. Vetinari had obviously felt well enough to get up and walk over here, but here was where he had collapsed. You couldn't poison a splinter or a nail because he wouldn't keep on nicking himself. There was a book half buried in the papers, but it had a lot of bookmarks in it, mostly torn bits of old letters. What did he do every day? Vimes opened the book. Every page was covered with handwritten symbols. You have to get a poison like arsenic into the body. It isn't enough to touch it. Or is it? Is there a kind of arsenic you can pick up through the skin? No one was getting in. Vimes was almost certain of that. The food and drink were probably all right, but he'd get Detritus to go and have another one of his little talks with the cooks in any case. Something he breathed? How could you keep that up day after day without arousing suspicion somewhere? Anyway, you'd have to get your poison into the room. Something already in the room? Cheery had a different carpet put down and replaced the bed. What else could you do? Strip the paint from the ceiling? What had Vetinari told Cheery about poisoning? You put it where no one will look at all. Vimes realised he was still staring at the book. There wasn't anything there that he could recognise. It must be a code of some sort. Knowing Vetinari, it wouldn't be crackable by anyone in a normal frame of mind. Could you poison a book? But so what? There were other books. You'd have to know he'd look at this one continuously. And even then, you'd have to get the poison into him. A man might prick his finger once, and after that he'd take care. It sometimes worried Vimes, the way he suspected everything. If you started wondering whether a man could be poisoned by words, you might as well accuse the wallpaper of driving him mad. Mind you, that horrible green colour could drive anyone insane. Bingley, beep, bleep, bleep. Oh, no. This is your 6 a.m. wake-up call. Good morning. Here are your appointments for today. Insert name here. 10 a.m. Shut up. Listen, whatever's in my diary for today is definitely not... Vimes stopped. He lowered the box. He went back to the desk. If you assumed one page per day... Lord Vetinari had a very good memory. But everyone wrote things down, didn't they? You couldn't remember every little thing. Wednesday, 3 p.m., reign of terror, 3.15 p.m., clean-out scorpion pit. He held the organiser up to his lips. Take a memo, he said. Hooray! Go right ahead. Don't forget to say memo first. Speak to... Blast. Memo. What about Vetinari's journal? Is that it? Yes. Someone knocked politely at the door. Vimes opened it carefully. Oh, it's you, Littlebottom. Vimes blinked. Something wasn't right about the dwarf. I'll mix up some of Mr. Donut's jollop right away, sir. The dwarf looked past Vimes to the bed. Ooh, he doesn't look good, does he? Get someone to move him into a different bedroom, said Vimes. Get the servers to prepare a new room, right? Yes, sir. And after they've done it, pick a different room at random and move him into it. And change everything, understand? Every stick of furniture, every vase, every rug. Er, yes, sir, Vimes hesitated. Now he could put his finger on what had been bothering him for the last 20 seconds. Littlebottom? Sir? You, er... You... On your ears? Earrings, sir, said Cheery nervously. Constable Anguir gave them to me. Really? Er... Right. I didn't think dwarfs wore jewellery, that's all. We're known for rings, sir. Yes, of course. Rings, yes. No-one quite like a dwarf for forging a magical ring. But... magical earrings? Oh, well. There were some waters too deep to wade. Sergeant Detritus's approach to these matters was almost instinctively correct. He had the palace staff lined up in front of him and was shouting at them at the top of his voice. Look at old Detritus, Vimes thought as he went down the stairs. Just your basic thick troll a few years ago, now a valuable member of the Watch, provided you get him to repeat his orders back to you to make sure he understands you. His armour gleams even brighter than carrots because he doesn't get bored with polishing. And he's mastered policing as it is practised by the majority of forces in the universe, which is basically screaming angrily at people until they give in. The only reason that he's not a one-troll reign of terror is the ease with which his thought processes can be derailed by anyone who tries something fiendishly cunning like an outright denial. I know you all done it, he was shouting. If the person what done it does not own up, the whole staff, and I means this, the whole staff will be locked up in the Tanti, also with throws the key away. He pointed a finger at a stout scullery maid. It was you what done it own up. No, Detritus paused. Detritus paused. Then, where was you last night? Own up. In bed, of course. Aha, that's a likely story. Own up. That where you always is at night? Of course. Ha, ha, ha, ha. Own up. You got witnesses? Source. Ah, so you got no witnesses. You done it then. Own up. No. Oh. All right, all right, thank you, Sergeant. That will be all for now, said Vimes, patting him on the shoulder. Are all the staff here? He glared at the line-up. Well, are you all here? There was a certain amount of reluctant shuffling among the ranks, and then someone cautiously put up a hand. Mildred Easy hasn't been seen since yesterday, said its owner. She's the upstairs maid. A boy come with a message. She had to go off to see her family. Vimes felt the faintest prickles on the back of his neck. Anyone know why? he said. Dunno, sir. All right. Sergeant, before you go off shift, get someone to find her, and then go and get some sleep. The rest of you, go and get on with whatever it is you do. Ah, Mr. Drumnott. The patrician's personal clerk, who'd been watching Detritus's technique with a horrified expression, looked up at him. Yes, Commander? What's this book? Is it his lordship's diary? Drumnott took the book. It looks like it, certainly. Have you been able to crack the code? I didn't know it was in code, Commander. What? You've never looked at it? Why should I, sir? It's not mine. You do know his last secretary tried to kill him? Yes, sir. I ought to say, sir, that I have already been exhaustively interrogated by your men. Drumnott opened the book and raised his eyebrows. What did they say? said Vimes. Drumnott looked up thoughtfully. Let me see now. It was you what done it, own up. Everybody seen you. We got lots of people say you done it. You done it all right, didn't you? Own up. That was, I think, the general approach. And then I said it wasn't me, and that seemed to puzzle the officer concerned. Drumnott delicately licked his fingers and turned a page. Vimes stared at him. The sound of saws was brisk on the morning air. Captain Carrot knocked against the timber-yard door, which was eventually opened. Good morning, sir, he said. I understand you have a golem here. Had, said the timber-merchant. Oh dear, another one, said Angua. That made four so far. The one in the foundry had knelt under a hammer. The one in the stonemasons' yard was now ten clay toes sticking out from under a two-ton block of limestone. One working in the docks had last been seen in the river, striding towards the sea. And now this one. It was weird, said the merchant, thumping the golem's chest. Sydney said it went on sawing all the way up to the moment it sawed its head right off. I've got a load of ash planking got to go out this afternoon. Who's going to saw it up, may I ask? Angua picked up the golem's head. In so far as it had any expression at all, it was one of intense concentration. Here, said the merchant. He told me he heard in the drum last night that golems have been murdering people. Inquiries are continuing, said Carrot. Now then, mister, it's Preble Skink, isn't it? Your brother runs the lamp-oil shop in Cable Street, and your daughter is a maid at the University. The man looked astonished, but Carrot knew everyone. Yeah. Did your golem leave the yard yesterday evening? Well, early on. Something about a holy day. He looked nervously from one to the other. You've got to let them go, otherwise the word's in their heads. And then it came back and worked all night. Yeah, what else would it do? And then Alf came in on early turn, and he said it came up out of the saw-pit, stood there for a moment, and then... Was it sawing pine logs yesterday? said Angua. That's right. Where am I going to get another golem at short notice, may I ask? What's this? said Angua. She picked up a wood-framed square from the heap of sawdust. This was its slate, was it? she handed it to Carrot. Thou shalt not kill, Carrot read slowly, clay of my clay ashamed. Do you have any idea why it'd write that? Search me, said Skink. They're always doing dumb things.