thoughts like that. One said, At least it's clean this way. No blood. And it would be for the good of the city, of course. They nodded gravely. No one needed to say that what was good for them was good for Ark Moorpork. And he won't die? Apparently, he can be kept merely unwell. The dosage can be varied, I'm told. I'd rather have him unwell than dead. I wouldn't trust Vetinari to stay in a grave. I've heard that he once said he'd prefer to be cremated, as a matter of fact. Then I just hope they scatter the ashes really widely, that's all. What about the watch? What about it? Ah. Lord Vetinari opened his eyes. Against all rationality, his hair ached. He concentrated, and a blur by the bed focused into the shape of Samuel Vimes. Ah, Vimes, he said weakly. How are you feeling, sir? Truly dreadful. Who was that little man with the incredibly bandy legs? That was Doughnut Jimmy, sir. He used to be a jockey on a very fat horse. A racehorse, apparently, sir. A fat racehorse? Surely that could never win a race? I don't believe it ever did, sir, but Jimmy made a lot of money by not winning races. Ah. He gave me milk and some sort of sticky potion, Vetinari concentrated. I was heartily sick. So I understand, sir. Funny phrase, that, heartily sick. I wonder why it's a cliché. Sounds jolly, rather cheerful, really. Yes, sir. Feel like I've got a bad dose of the flu, Vimes. Head not working properly. Really, sir. The patrician thought for a while. There was obviously something else on his mind. Why did he still smell of horses, Vimes? He said at last. He's a horse doctor, sir. A damn good one. I heard last month he treated dire fortune and it didn't fall over until the last furlong. Doesn't sound helpful, Vimes? Oh, I don't know, sir. The horse had dropped dead coming up to the starting line. Ah, I see. Well, well, well. What a nasty suspicious mind you have, Vimes. Thank you, sir. The patrician raised himself on his elbows. Should toenails throb, Vimes? Couldn't say, sir. Now I think I should like to read for a while. Life goes on, huh? Vimes went to the window. There was a nightmarish figure crouched on the edge of the balcony outside, staring into the thickening fog. Everything all right, Constable Downspout? Yes, sir, said the apparition. I'll shut the window now. The fog is coming in. Right you are, sir. Vimes closed the window, trapping a few tendrils which gradually faded away. What was that? said Lord Vetinari. Constable Downspout's a gargoyle, sir. He's no good on parade and bloody useless on the street, but when it comes to staying in one place, sir, you can't beat him. He's world champion at not moving. If you want the winner of the hundred metres standing still, that's him. He spent three days on a roof in the rain when we caught the park lane knobbler. Nothing'll get past him. And there's Corporal Gimletson patrolling the corridor, and Constable Glod's nephew on the floor below, and Constable Flint and Moraine in the rooms on either side of you, and Sergeant Detritus will be around constantly, so that if anyone nods off, he'll kick arse, sir. And you'll know when he does that, because the poor bugger'll come right through the wall. Well done, Vimes. Am I right in thinking that all my guards are non-human? They all seem to be dwarfs and trolls. Safest way, sir. You've thought of everything, Vimes. Hope so, sir. Thank you, Vimes. Vetinari sat up and took a mass of papers off the bedside table. And now, don't let me detain you. Vimes' mouth dropped open. Vetinari looked up. Was there anything else, Commander? Well, I suppose not, sir. I suppose I'd just better run along, eh? If you wouldn't mind. And I'm sure a lot of paperwork has accumulated in my office, so if you'd send someone to fetch it, I would be obliged. Vimes shut the door behind him. A little harder than necessary. Gods, it made him livid the way Vetinari turned him on and off like a switch, and had as much natural gratitude as an alligator. The patrician relied on Vimes doing his job, knew he'd do his job, and that was the extent of his thoughts on the matter. Well, one day Vimes would... would... would bloody well do his job, of course, because he didn't know how to do anything else. But realising that made it all the worse. Outside the palace, the fog was thick and yellow. Vimes nodded to the guards on the door and looked out at the clinging, swirling clouds. It was almost a straight line to the watch-house in Pseudopolis Yard, and the fog had brought early night to the city. Not many people were on the streets. They stayed indoors, barring the windows against the damp shreds that seemed to leak in everywhere. Yes. Empty streets, a chilly night, dampness in the air. Only one thing was needed to make it perfect. He sent the sedan men on home and walked back to one of the guards. You're Constable Lucker, aren't you? Yes, sir, Sir Samuel. What size boots do you take? Lucker looked panicky. What, sir? It's a simple question, man. Seven and a half, sir. From old plugger in new cobblers, the cheap ones? Yes, sir. Can't have a man guarding the palace in cardboard boots, said Vimes with mock cheerfulness. Off with them, Constable. You can have mine. They've still got Wyvern, well, whatever it is Wyverns do, on them, but they'll fit you. Don't stand there with your mouth open. Give me your boots, man. You can keep mine, Vimes added. I've got lots. The constable watched in frightened astonishment as Vimes pulled on the cheap pair and stood upright, stamping a few times with his eyes shut. Ah, he said. I'm in front of the palace, right? Yes, sir. You've just come out of it, sir. Here's your boots. You've just come out of it, sir. It's this big building here. Ah, said Vimes brightly, but I'd know I was here even if I hadn't. Ah, it's the flagstones, said Vimes. They're an unusual size and slightly dished in the middle. Hadn't you noticed? Your feet, lad. That's what you'll have to learn to think with. The bemused constable watched him disappear into the fog, stamping happily. Corporal the Right Honourable the Earl of Ankh, Nobby Nobbs, pushed open the watch-house door and staggered inside. Sergeant Colon looked up from the desk and gasped. You OK, Nobby? he said, hurrying around to support the swaying figure. It's terrible, Fred. Terrible. Here, take a seat, you're all pale. I've been elevated, Fred, moaned Nobby. Nasty. Did you see who did it? Nobby wordlessly handed him the scroll. Dragon King of Arms had pressed into his hand and flopped back. He took a tiny length of homemade cigarette from behind his ear and lit it with a shaking hand. Hot, no, I'm sure, he said. You do your best. You keep your head down. You don't make any trouble. And then something like this happens to you. Colon read the scroll slowly, his lips moving when he came to difficult words like and and the. Nobby, you've read this? It says you're a lord. The old man said they'd have to do a lot of checking up, but he thought it was pretty clear what with the ring and all. Fred, what am I going to do? Sit back and eat off a rum and pleats, I should think. That's just it, Fred. There's no money, no big house, no land, not a brass farthing. What, nothing? Not a dried pea, Fred. I thought all the upper crust had parts of money. Well, I'm the crust on its uppers, Fred. I don't know anything about lording. I don't want to have to wear posh clothes and go to hunt bulls and all that stuff. Sergeant Colon sat down beside him. You never suspected you got any posh connections? Well, my cousin Vincent once got done for indecently assaulting the Duchess of Quirm's housemaid. Chambermaid or scullerymaid? Scullerymaid, I think. Probably doesn't count, then. Does anyone else know about all this? Well, she did, and she went and told— I mean about your lordshipping. Only Mr. Vimes. Well, there you are, said Sergeant Colon, handing him back the scroll. You don't have to tell anyone. Then you don't have to go around wearing golden trousers, and you needn't hunt bulls unless you've lost them. You just sit there, and I'll fetch you a cup of tea. How about that? We'll see it through, don't you worry. You're a tough, Fred. That makes two of us, my lord, Colon waggled his eyebrows. Get it? Get it? Don't, Fred, said Nobby, wearily. The watch-house door opened. Fog poured in like smoke. In the midst of it were two red eyes. The parting shreds revealed the massive figure of a golem. Said Sergeant Colon. The golem held up its slate. I have come to you. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I've, uh, uh, yeah, oh, yeah, I can see that, said Colon. Dawful turned the slate round. The other side read. I give myself up for murder. It was I who killed the old priest. The crime is solved. Colon, once his lips had stopped moving, scurried behind the suddenly very flimsy defences of his desk and scrabbled through the papers there. You keep it covered, Nobby, he said. Make sure it don't run off. Why's it going to run off, said Nobby. Sergeant Colon found a relatively clean piece of paper. Well, well, well, uh, I, uh, well, I guess I'd better, uh, uh, what's your name? The golem wrote. By the time he was on the brass bridge—medium-sized cobbles of the rounded sort they called cat-heads, quite a few missing—Vimes was already beginning to wonder if he'd done the right thing. Autumn fogs were always thick, but he'd never known it this bad. The pall muffled the sounds of the city and turned the brightest lights into dimmed glows, even though in theory the sun hadn't set yet. He walked along by the parapet. A squat, glistening shape loomed in the fog. It was one of the wooden hippos, some distant ancestor of Roderick or Keith. There were four on either side, all looking out towards the sea. Vimes had walked past them thousands of times. They were old friends. He'd often stood in the lee of one on chilly nights when he was looking for somewhere out of trouble. That's what it used to be like, wasn't it? It hardly ever rained, and it hardly ever snowed. That's what it used to be like, wasn't it? It hardly seemed that long ago, just a handful of them in the watch, staying out of trouble. And then Carrot had arrived, and suddenly the narrow circuit of their lives had opened up, and there were nearly thirty men—oh, including Trolls and Dwarfs and Miscellaneous—in the watch now. And they didn't skulk around keeping out of trouble. They went looking for trouble, and they found it everywhere they looked. Funny, that. As Vetinari had pointed out in that way of his, the more policemen you had, the more crimes seemed to be committed. But the watch was back and out there on the streets, and if they weren't actually as good as Detritus at kicking arse, they were definitely prodding buttock. He lit a match on a hippo's toenail and cupped his hand around it to shield his cigar from the damp. These murders, now. No one would care if the watch didn't care. Two old men murdered on the same day, nothing stolen. He'd corrected himself. Nothing apparently stolen. Of course, the thing about things that were stolen was that the bloody things weren't there. They almost certainly hadn't been fooling around with other people's wives. They probably couldn't remember what fooling around was. One spent his time among old religious books. The other, for God's sakes, was an authority on the aggressive uses of baking. People would probably say they had lived blameless lives. But Vimes was a policeman. No one lived a completely blameless life. It might be just possible, by lying very still in a cellar somewhere, to get through a day without committing a crime. But only just. And even then you were probably guilty of loitering. Anyway, Angua seemed to have taken this case personally. She always had a soft spot for the underdog. So did Vimes. You had to. Not because they were pure or noble, because they weren't. You had to be on the side of underdogs, because they weren't overdogs. Everyone in this city looked after themselves. That's what the guilds were for. People banded together against other people. The guilds looked after you from the cradle to the grave, or in the case of the assassins, to other people's graves. They even maintained the law, or at least they had done, after a fashion. Thieving without a reason. Thieving without a license was punishable by death for the first offence. The Ankh-Morpork view of crime and punishment was that the penalty for the first offence should prevent the possibility of a second offence. The thieves' guild saw to that. The arrangement sounded unreal, but it worked. It worked like a machine. That was fine, except for the occasional people who got crushed in the wheels. The damp cobbles felt reassuringly real under his soles. God, he'd missed this. He'd patrolled alone in the old days. When there was just him and the stones glistened around 3 a.m., it all seemed to make sense somehow. He stopped. Around him the world became a crystal of horror, a special horror that has nothing to do with fangs, or Ichor, or ghosts, but has everything to do with the familiar becoming unfamiliar. Something fundamental was wrong. It took a few dreadful seconds for his mind to supply the details of what his subconscious had noticed. There had been five statues along the parapet on this side, but there should have been four. He turned very slowly and walked back to the last one. It was a hippo, all right. So was the next one. There was graffiti on it. Nothing supernatural had Zaz is a Wonka scrawled on it. It seemed to him that it didn't take quite so long to get to the next one, and when he looked at it, two red points of light flared in the fog above him. Something big and dark leapt down, knocked him to the ground, and disappeared into the gloom. Vimes struggled to his feet, shook his head, and set off after it. No thought was involved. It is the ancient instinct of terriers and policemen to chase anything that runs away. And as he ran, he felt automatically for his bell, which would summon other watchmen. But the commander of the watch didn't carry a bell. Commanders of the watch were on their own. In Vimes's squalid office, Captain Carrot stared at a piece of paper. Repairs to guttering, watch house, pseudopolis yard. New downpipe, thirty-five degrees, micklewhite bend, four right-angled trusses, labour and making good, sixteen dollars and thirty-five pence. There were more like them, including Constable Downspout's pigeon bill. He knew Sergeant Colon objected to the idea of a policeman being paid in pigeons, but Constable Downspout was a gargoyle, and gargoyles had no concept of money. But they knew a pigeon when they ate it. Still, things were improving. When Carrot had arrived, the entire watch's petty cash had been kept on a shelf in a tin marked, strong in the arms, armour polish for gleaming cohorts. And if money was needed for anything, all you had to do was go and find Nobby and force him to give it back. Then there was a letter from a resident in Park Lane, one of the most select addresses in the city. Commander Vimes, the night-watch patrol in this street appears to be made up entirely of dwarfs. I have nothing against dwarfs among their own kind, at least they are not trolls, but one hears stories, and I have daughters in the house. I demand that this situation is remedied instantly, otherwise I shall have no option but to take up the matter with Lord Vetinari, who is a personal friend. I am, sir, your obedient servant, Joshua H. Catterail. This was police work, was it? He wondered if Mr. Vimes were trying to tell him something. There were other letters. The Community Coordinator of Equal Heights for Dwarfs was demanding that dwarfs in the watch be allowed to carry an axe rather than the traditional sword, and should be sent to investigate only those crimes committed by tall people. The Thieves' Guild was complaining that Commander Vimes had said publicly that most thefts were committed by thieves. You'd need the wisdom of King Isaiah Danu to tackle them, and these were only today's letters. He picked up the next one and read, Translation of Text Found in Father Tubalchek's Mouth, Y. S. V. Carrot dutifully read the translation. In his mouth? Someone tried to put words in his mouth, said Carrot to the silent room. He shivered, but not because of the cold that came from fear. Vimes's office was always cold. Vimes was an outdoors person. Fog was dancing in the open window, little fingers of it drifting in the light. The next paper down the heap was a copy of Cheery's iconograph. Carrot stared at the two blurred red eyes. Captain Carrot? He half turned his head but kept looking at the picture. Yes, Fred? We've got the murderer! We've got him! Is he a golem? How did you know that? The tincture of night began to suffuse the soup of the afternoon. Lord Vetinari considered the sentence and found it good. He liked tincture particularly. Tincture. Tincture. It was a distinguished word and pleasantly countered by the flatness of soup. The soup of the afternoon. Yes, in which may well be found the croutons of tea time. He was aware that he was a little light-headed. He'd never have thought a sentence like that in a normal frame of mind. In the fog outside the window, just visible by the candlelight, he saw the crouching shape of Constable Downspout. A gargoyle, huh? He'd wondered why the watch was indented for five pigeons a week on its wages bill. A gargoyle in the watch whose job it was to watch. That would be Captain Carrot's idea. Lord Vetinari got up carefully from the bed and closed the shutters. He walked slowly to his writing table, pulled his journal out of its drawer, then tugged out a wad of manuscript and unstopped the ink bottle.