was that his data couldn't tell him who was a good candidate and who wasn't. It was therefore impossible to tease out the effect of the money. As with the police crime rate puzzle, he had to trick the data. Because he himself had typed in the data, he had noticed something. Often, the same two candidates faced each other multiple times. By analyzing the data from only those elections, Levitt was able to find a true result. His conclusion? Campaign money has about one tenth the impact, as was commonly accepted. An unknown graduate student at the time, he sent his paper to the Journal of Political Economy. One professor told him he was crazy for even trying, where it was published. He completed his PhD in three years, but because of his priorities, he says, he was invisible to the faculty. A real zero, he says. Then he stumbled upon what he now calls the turning point in his career. He had an interview for the Society of Fellows, the venerable intellectual Harvard clubhouse that pays young scholars to do their own work for three years with no commitments. Levitt felt he didn't stand a chance. For starters, he didn't consider himself an intellectual. He would be interviewed over dinner by the Senior Fellows, a collection of world-renowned philosophers, scientists, and historians. He worried he wouldn't have enough conversation for even the first course. Instead, he was on fire. Whatever subject came up, the brain, ants, philosophy, he just happened to remember something pithy he'd read. His wit crackled as it had never crackled before. When he told them about the two summers he spent bedding the horses back in Minnesota, they ate it up. Finally, disquietingly, one of them said, I'm having a hard time seeing the unifying theme of your work. Could you explain it? Levitt was stymied. He had no idea what his unifying theme was or even if he had one. Amartya Sen, the future Nobel-winning economist, jumped in and neatly summarized what he saw as Levitt's theme. Yes, Levitt said eagerly, that's my theme. Another fellow then offered another theme. You're right, Levitt said, that's my theme. And so it went, like dogs tugging at a bone, until the philosopher Robert Nozick interrupted. If Levitt could have been said to have an intellectual hero, it would be Nozick. How old are you, Steve? Nozick asked. 26. Nozick turned to the other fellows. He's 26 years old. Why does he need to have a unifying theme? Maybe he's going to be one of those people who's so talented he doesn't need one. He'll take a question, he'll just answer it, and it'll be fine. The University of Chicago's economics department had a famous unifying theme, the gospel of free markets, with a conservative twist, and would therefore not have seemed the most likely fit for Levitt. As he sees it, Chicago is about theory, deep thinking, and big ideas, while he is about empiricism, clever thinking, and cute but ultimately insubstantial ideas. But Chicago also had Gary Becker. To Levitt, Becker is the most influential economist of the past 50 years. Long before it was fashionable, Becker brought microeconomic theory to offbeat topics, the family and crime in particular. For years, Becker was demonized. A single phrase like, the price of children, would set off untold alarms. I took a lot of heat over my career from people who thought my work was silly, or irrelevant, or not economics, Becker says today. But Chicago supported him. He persevered, winning the Nobel Prize in 1992, and he became Steven Levitt's role model. Becker told Levitt that Chicago would be a great environment for him. Not everybody agrees with all your results, he said, but we agree what you're doing is very interesting work and will support you in that. Levitt soon found that the support at Chicago went beyond the scholarly. The year after he was hired, his wife gave birth to their first child, Andrew. One day, just after Andrew turned a year old, he came down with a slight fever. The doctor diagnosed an ear infection. When he started vomiting the next morning, his parents took him to the hospital. A few days later, he was dead of pneumococcal meningitis. Amid the shock and grief, Levitt had an undergraduate class that needed teaching. It was Gary Becker, a Nobel laureate nearing his 70th birthday, who sat in for Levitt. Another colleague, D. Gail Johnson, sent a condolence card that Levitt still quotes from memory. Levitt and Johnson, an agricultural economist in his 80s, began speaking regularly. Levitt learned that Johnson's daughter was one of the first Americans to adopt a daughter from China. Soon, the Levitt's adopted a daughter of their own, whom they named Amanda. In addition to Amanda, they have since had a daughter, now almost three, and a son. But Andrew's death has played on in various ways. They have become close friends with the family of the little girl to whom they donated Andrew's liver. They also donated his heart, but that baby died. And not surprisingly for a scholar who pursues real-life subjects, the death also informed Levitt's work. He and Jeanette joined a support group for grieving parents. Levitt was struck by how many children had drowned in swimming pools. They were the kinds of deaths that don't make the newspaper, unlike, for instance, a child who dies while playing with a gun. Levitt was curious and went looking for numbers that would tell the story. He wrote up the results as an op-ed article for the Chicago Sun-Times. It featured the sort of plangent counter-intuition for which he has become famous. If you own a gun and have a swimming pool in the yard, the swimming pool is almost 100 times more likely to kill a child than the gun is. Trying to get his mind off death, Levitt took up a hobby, rehabbing and selling old houses in Oak Park, where he lives. This experience has led to yet another paper about the real estate market. It is his most Chicago-style paper yet, a romp in price theory, a sign that the university's influence on him is perhaps as strong as his influence on it. But Levitt being Levitt, it also deals with corruption. While negotiating to buy old houses, he found that the seller's agent often encouraged him, albeit cagely, to underbid. This seemed odd. Didn't the agent represent the seller's best interest? Then he thought more about the agent's role. Like many other experts, auto mechanics and stockbrokers come to mind, a real estate agent is thought to know his field far better than a lay person. A homeowner is encouraged to trust the agent's information. So if the agent brings in a low offer and says it might just be the best the homeowner can expect, the homeowner tends to believe him. But the key, Levitt determined, lay in the fact that agents, as he wrote, receive only a small share of the incremental profit when a house sells for a higher value. Like a stockbroker churning commissions or a bookie grabbing his vig, an agent was simply looking to make a deal, any deal, so he would push homeowners to sell too fast and too cheap. Now, if Levitt could only measure this effect, once again he found a clever mechanism. Using data from more than 50,000 home sales in Cook County, Illinois, he compared the figures for homes owned by real estate agents with those for homes for which they acted only as agents. The agents' homes stayed on the market about 10 days longer and sold for 2% more. Late on a summer afternoon, Levitt is in his office deep inside one of the university's gothic behemoths. The ceiling is stained, the plaster around the window crumbling. He's just back from a sabbatical at Stanford and his desk is a holy mess, stacks of books and journals, a green sippy cup, and a little orange squeeze hippo. This is his afternoon to meet with students. Levitt drinks a Mountain Dew and talks softly. Some students come for research assignments, some for advice. One has just written her undergraduate thesis, The Labor Market Consequence of Graduating College in a Bad Economy. For a thesis, Levitt tells her, it's very good, but now she wants to have it published. You write like a college student and that's a problem, he says. The thing is, you're telling a story. There's foreshadowing going on, all those tricks. You want the reader going down a particular path so when they get the results, they understand them and believe them. But you also want to be honest about your weaknesses. People are much less harsh on weaknesses that are clear than weaknesses that are hidden, as they should be. Be honest about your weaknesses. Has there ever been a prize-winning scholar as honest about his weaknesses as Steven Levitt? He doesn't understand economics, he claims, or math. He's a little thinker in a world of big thinkers. Can't even open a jar of spaghetti sauce at home, the poor guy. Friends say that Levitt's self-deprecation is as calculated as it is genuine. Within academia, economists take pride in being the most cutthroat of a cutthroat breed. Anyone who writes papers on the weakest link, contestants discriminate against Latino and elderly peers, Levitt concluded, but not blacks or women. In sumo wrestling, to best manage their tournament rankings, wrestlers often conspire to throw matches. Had better not also be arrogant. Or maybe it is not self-deprecation at all. Maybe it is self-flagellation. Maybe what Steven Levitt really wants is to graduate from his silly and trivial and shallow topics. He thinks he's on to something with a new paper about black names. He wants to know if someone with a distinctly black name suffers an economic penalty. His answer, contrary to other recent research, is no. But now he has a bigger question. Is black culture a cause of racial inequality or is it a consequence? For an economist, even for Levitt, this is new turf, quantifying culture, he calls it. As a task, he finds it thorny, messy, perhaps impossible, and deeply tantalizing. Driving home to Oak Park that evening, his Cavalier glumly thrumming along the Eisenhower Expressway, Levitt dutifully addresses his future. Leaving academia for a hedge fund or a government job does not interest him, though he might on the side start a company to catch cheating teachers. He is said to be at the top of every economics department's poaching list, but the tree that he and Jeanette planted when Andrew died is getting too big to move. You get the feeling he may stay at Chicago a while. There are important problems, he says, that he feels ready to address. For instance, tax evasion, he says, money laundering. I'd like to put together a set of tools that lets us catch terrorists. I mean, that's the goal. I don't necessarily know yet how I'd go about it, but given the right data, I have little doubt that I could figure out the answer. It might seem absurd for an economist to dream of catching terrorists, just as it must have seemed absurd if you were a Chicago school teacher called into an office and told that, ahem, the algorithms designed by that skinny man with thick glasses had determined that you are a cheater and that you are being fired. Steven Levitt may not fully believe in himself, but he does believe in this. Teachers and criminals and real estate agents may lie, and politicians and even CIA analysts, but numbers don't. Up in smoke, whatever happened to crack cocaine? From the New York Times magazine, August 7th, 2005. If you rely on the news media for your information, you probably think that crack cocaine is a thing of the past. If you rely on data, however, you reach a different conclusion. Measuring the use and impact of a drug like crack isn't easy. There's no government website to provide crack data, and surveying dealers is bound to be pretty unreliable. So how can you get to the truth of crack use? One way is to look at a variety of imperfect but plausible proxies, including cocaine arrests, emergency room visits, and deaths. Unlike the volume of news coverage, the rates for all these remain shockingly high. Cocaine arrests, for instance, have fallen only about 15% since the crack boom of the late 1980s. Cocaine-related deaths are actually higher now. So are the number of emergency room visits due to cocaine. When combined in a sensible way, these proxies can be used to construct a helpful index of crack cocaine. And what does this index reveal? It says that crack use was non-existent until the early 1980s and spiked like mad in 1985, peaking in 1989. It says that it arrived early on the West Coast but became most prevalent in the cities of the Northeast and Middle Atlantic states, and that it produced a remarkable level of gun violence, particularly among young black men who made up the bulk of street-level crack dealers. During the crack boom, the homicide rate among 13 to 17-year-old blacks more than quadrupled. But perhaps the biggest surprise in the crack index is the fact that as of 2000, the most recent year for which the index data are available, Americans were still smoking about 70% as much crack as they smoked when consumption was at its peak. If so much crack is still being sold and bought, why are we hearing about it? Well, because crack-associated violence has largely disappeared, and it was the violence that made crack most relevant to the middle class. What made the violence go away? Simple economics. Urban street gangs were the main distributors of crack cocaine. In the beginning, demand for their product was phenomenal, and so were the potential profits. Most crack killings, it turns out, were not a result of some crackhead sticking up a grandmother for drug money, but rather one crack dealer shooting another and perhaps a few bystanders in order to gain turf. But the market changed fast. The destructive effects of the drug became apparent. Young people saw the damage that crack inflicted on older users and began to stay away from it. One recent survey showed that crack use is now three times as common among people in their late thirties as it is among those in their late teens and early twenties. As demand fell, price wars broke out, driving down profits. And as the amount of money at stake grew smaller, the violence also dissipated. Young gang members are still selling crack on street corners, but when a corner becomes less valuable, there is less incentive to kill or be killed for it. So how can it be that crack consumption is still so high? Part of the answer may have to do with geography. The index shows that consumption is actually up in states far from the coasts, like Arizona, Minnesota, Colorado, and Michigan. But the main answer lies in the same price shift that made the crack trade less violent. The price has fallen about 75% from its peak, which has led to an interesting consumption pattern. There are far fewer users today, but they are each smoking more crack. This, too, makes perfect economic sense. If you are a devoted crackhead and the price is one-fourth what it used to be, you can afford to smoke four times as much. But as crack has matured into a drug that causes less social harm, the laws punishing its sale have stayed the same. In 1986, in the national frenzy that followed the death of Len Bias, a first- round NBA draft pick and a cocaine user, Congress passed legislation requiring a five-year mandatory sentence for selling just five grams of crack. You would have to sell 500 grams of powder cocaine to get an equivalent sentence. This disparity has often been called racist since it disproportionately imprisons blacks. In fact, the law probably made sense at the time when a gram of crack cocaine did have far more devastating social costs than a gram of powder cocaine. But it doesn't anymore. Len Bias would now be 40 years old and he would have long outlived his usefulness to the Boston Celtics. It may be time to acknowledge that the law inspired by his death has done the same. Does the truth lie within? One professor's lifetime of self-experimentation. From the New York Times Magazine, September 11, 2005. Seth Roberts is a 52-year-old psychology professor at the University of California at Berkeley. If you knew Roberts 25 years ago, you might remember him as a man with problems. He had acne and most days he woke up too early, which left him exhausted. He wasn't depressed, but he wasn't always in the best of moods. Most troubling to Roberts, he was overweight. At 5 foot 11, he weighed 200 pounds. When you encounter Seth Roberts today, he is a clear-skinned, well-rested, entirely affable man who weighs about 160 pounds and looks 10 years younger than his age. How did this happen? It began when Roberts was a graduate student. First, he had the clever idea of turning his personal problems into research subjects. Then, he decided that he would use his own body as a laboratory. Thus did Roberts embark on one of the longest bouts of scientific self-experimentation known to man. Not only poking, prodding, and measuring himself more than might be wise, but also rigorously recording every data point along the way. Self-experimentation, though hardly a new idea in the sciences, remains rare. Many modern scientists dismiss it as not being nearly scientific enough. There's no obvious control group and you can hardly run a double-blind experiment when the researcher and subject are the same person. But might the not-quite-scientific nature of self-experimentation also be a good thing? A great many laboratory-based scientific experiments, especially those in the medical field, are later revealed to have been marred by poor methodology or blatant self-interest. In the case of Roberts, his self-interest is extreme, but at least it is obvious. His methodology is so simple, trying a million solutions until he finds one that works, that it creates the utmost transparency. In some ways, self-experimentation has more in common with economics than with the hard sciences. Without the ability to run randomized experiments, economists are often left to exploit whatever data they can get hold of. Let's say you're an economist trying to measure