heed the expert's advice on these horrors when, like that mean uncle telling too scary stories to two young children, he has reduced us to quivers. No one is more susceptible to an expert's fear-mongering than a parent. Fear is in fact a major component of the act of parenting. A parent, after all, is the steward of another creature's life, a creature who, in the beginning, is more helpless than the newborn of nearly any other species. This leads a lot of parents to spend a lot of their parenting energy simply being scared. The problem is that they're often scared of the wrong things. It's not their fault, really. Separating facts from rumors is always hard work, especially for a busy parent, and the white noise generated by the experts to say nothing of the pressure exerted by fellow parents is so overwhelming they can barely think for themselves. The facts they do manage to glean have usually been varnished or exaggerated or otherwise taken out of context to serve an agenda that isn't their own. Consider the parents of an eight-year-old girl named, say, Molly. Her two best friends, Amy and Imani, each live nearby. Molly's parents know that Amy's parents keep a gun in their house, so they have forbidden Molly to play there. Instead, Molly spends a lot of time at Imani's house, which has a swimming pool in the backyard. Molly's parents feel good about having made such a smart choice to protect their daughter. But, according to the data, their choice isn't smart at all. In a given year, there is one drowning of a child for every 11,000 residential pools in the United States. In a country with six million pools, this means that roughly 550 children under the age of 10 drown each year. Meanwhile, there is one child killed by a gun for every 1 million plus guns. In a country with an estimated 200 million guns, this means that roughly 175 children under 10 die each year from guns. The likelihood of death by swimming pool, one in 11,000, versus death by gun, one in 1 million plus, isn't even close. Molly is roughly a hundred times more likely to die in a swimming accident at Imani's house than in gunplay at Amy's. But most of us, like Molly's parents, are terrible risk assessors. Peter Sandman, a self-described risk communications consultant in Princeton, New Jersey, made this point in early 2004 after a single case of mad cow disease in the United States prompted an anti-beef frenzy. The basic reality, Sandman told the New York Times, is that the risks that scare people and the risks that kill people are very different. Sandman offered a comparison between mad cow disease, a super scary but exceedingly rare threat, and the spread of foodborne pathogens in the average home kitchen, which is exceedingly common but somehow not very scary. Risks that you control are much less a source of outrage than risks that are out of your control, Sandman said. In the case of mad cow, it feels like it's beyond my control. I can't tell if my meat has prions in it or not. I can't see it. I can't smell it. Whereas dirt in my own kitchen is very much in my own control. I can clean my sponges. I can clean the floor. Sandman's control principle might also explain why most people are more scared of flying in an airplane than driving a car. Their thinking goes like this. Since I control the car, I'm the one keeping myself safe. Since I have no control of the airplane, I am at the mercy of myriad external factors. So, which should we actually fear more, flying or driving? It might first help to ask a more basic question. What exactly are we afraid of? Death, presumably. But the fear of death needs to be narrowed down. Of course, we all know that we are bound to die and we might worry about it casually. But if you are told that you have a 10% chance of dying within the next year, you might worry a lot more, perhaps even choosing to live your life differently. And if you were told that you have a 10% chance of dying within the next minute, you probably panic. So, it's the imminent possibility of death that drives the fear, which means that the most sensible way to calculate fear of death would be to think about it on a per hour basis. If you were taking a trip and have the choice of driving or flying, you might wish to consider the per hour death rate of driving versus flying. It is true that many more people die in the United States each year in motor vehicle accidents, roughly 40,000, than in airplane crashes, fewer than 1,000. But it's also true that most people spend a lot more time in cars than in airplanes. More people die even in boating accidents each year than in airplane crashes. As we saw with swimming pools versus guns, water is a lot more dangerous than most people think. The per hour death rate of driving versus flying, however, is about equal. So, the two contraptions, a car and a plane, are equally likely, or in truth equally unlikely, to lead to death. But fear best thrives in the present tense. That's why experts rely on it. In a world that is increasingly impatient with long-term processes, fear is a potent short-term play. Imagine that you are a government official charged with procuring the funds to fight one of two proven killers, terrorist attacks and heart disease. Which cause do you think the members of Congress will open up the coffers for? The likelihood of any given person being killed in a terrorist attack are infinitesimally smaller than the likelihood that the same person will clog up his arteries with fatty food and die of heart disease. But a terrorist attack happens now. Death by heart disease is some distant, quiet catastrophe. Terrorist acts lie beyond our control. French fries do not. Just as important as the control factor is what Peter Sandman calls the dread factor. Death by terrorist attack, or mad cow disease, is considered wholly dreadful. Death by heart disease is, for some reason, not. Sandman is an expert who works both sides of the aisle. One day he might help a group of environmentalists expose a public health hazard. His client the next day could be a fast-food CEO trying to deal with an E. coli outbreak. Sandman has reduced his expertise to a tidy equation. Risk equals hazard plus outrage. For the CEO with the bad hamburger meat, Sandman engages in outrage reduction. For the environmentalists, it's outrage increase. Note that Sandman addresses the outrage but not the hazard itself. He concedes that outrage and hazard do not carry equal weight in his risk equation. When hazard is high and outrage is low, people underreact, he says. And when hazard is low and outrage is high, they overreact. So why is a swimming pool less frightening than a gun? The thought of a child being shot through the chest with a neighbor's gun is gruesome, dramatic, horrifying, in a word, outrageous. Swimming pools do not inspire outrage. This is due in part to the familiarity factor. Just as most people spend more time in cars than in airplanes, most of us have a lot more experience swimming in pools than shooting guns. But it takes only about 30 seconds for a child to drown, and it often happens noiselessly. An infant can drown in water as shallow as a few inches. The steps to prevent drowning, meanwhile, are pretty straightforward. A watchful adult, a fence around the pool, a locked back door, so a toddler doesn't slip outside unnoticed. If every parent followed these precautions, the lives of perhaps 400 young children could be saved each year. That would outnumber the lives saved by two of the most widely promoted inventions in recent memory, safer cribs and child car seats. The data show that child car seats are, at best, nominally helpful. It is certainly safer to keep a child in the rear seat than sitting on a lap in the front seat, where in the event of an accident, he essentially becomes a projectile. But the safety to be gained here is from preventing the kids from riding shotgun, not from strapping them into a $200 car seat. Nevertheless, many parents so magnify the benefit of a car seat that they trek to the local police station or firehouse to have it installed just right. Theirs is a gesture of love, surely, but also a gesture of what might be called obsessive parenting. Obsessive parents know who they are and are generally proud of the fact. Non-obsessive parents also know who the obsessives are and tend to snicker at them. Most innovations in the field of child safety are affiliated with, shock of shocks, a new product to be marketed. Nearly 5 million car seats are sold each year. These products are often a response to some growing scare in which, as Peter Sandman might put it, the outrage outweighs the hazard. Compare the 400 lives that a few swimming pool precautions might save to the number of lives saved by far noisier crusades. Child-resistant packaging, an estimated 50 lives a year. Flame retardant pajamas, 10 lives. Keeping children away from airbags in cars, fewer than five young children a year have been killed by airbags since their introduction. And safety drawstrings on children's clothing, two lives. Hold on a minute, you say. What does it matter if parents are manipulated by experts and marketers? Shouldn't we applaud any effort, regardless of how minor or manipulative, that makes even one child safer? Don't parents already have enough to worry about? After all, parents are responsible for one of the most awesomely important feats we know, the very shaping of a child's character. Aren't they? The most radical shift of late in the conventional wisdom on parenting has been provoked by one simple question. How much do parents really matter? Clearly, bad parenting matters a great deal. As the link between abortion and crime makes clear, unwanted children, who are disproportionately subject to neglect and abuse, have worse outcomes than children who are eagerly welcomed by their parents. But how much can those eager parents actually accomplish for their children's sake? This question represents a crescendo of decades worth of research. A long line of studies, including research into twins who were separated at birth, had already concluded that genes alone are responsible for perhaps 50% of a child's personality and abilities. So if nature accounts for half of a child's destiny, what accounts for the other half? Surely it must be the nurturing, the baby Mozart tapes, the church sermons, the museum trips, the French lessons, the bargaining and hugging and quarreling and punishing that, in total, constitute the act of parenting. But how then to explain another famous study, the Colorado Adoption Project, which followed the lives of 245 babies put up for adoption and found virtually no correlation between the child's personality traits and those of his adopted parents. Or the other studies showing that a child's character wasn't much affected, whether or not he was sent to daycare, whether he had one parent or two, whether his mother worked or didn't, whether he had two mommies or two daddies or one of each. These nature-nurture discrepancies were addressed in a 1998 book by a little-known textbook author named Judith Rich Harris. The nurture assumption was, in effect, an attack on obsessive parenting, a book so provocative that it required two subtitles, Why Children Turn Out the Way They Do and Parents Matter Less Than You Think and Peers Matter More. Harris argued, albeit gently, that parents are wrong to think that they contribute so mightily to their child's personality. This belief, she wrote, was a cultural myth. Harris argued that the top-down influence of parents is overwhelmed by the grassroots effect of peer pressure, the blunt force applied each day by friends and schoolmates. The unlikeliness of Harris's bombshell, she was a grandmother no less, without PhD or academic affiliation, prompted both wonder and chagrin. The public may be forgiven for saying here we go again, wrote one reviewer. One year we're told bonding is the key, the next that it's birth order. Wait, what really matters is stimulation. The first five years of life are the most important. No, the first three years. No, it's all over by the first year. Forget that, it's all genetics. But Harris's theory was duly endorsed by a slate of heavyweights. Among them was Steven Pinker, the cognitive psychologist and best-selling author, who in his own book, Blank Slate, called Harris's views mind-boggling, in a good way. Quote, patients in traditional forms of psychotherapy while away their 50 minutes reliving childhood conflicts and learning to blame their unhappiness on how their parents treated them, Pinker wrote. Many biographies scavenge through the subject's childhood for the roots of the grown-ups tragedies and triumphs. Parenting experts make women feel like ogres if they slip out of the house to work or skip a reading of Goodnight Moon. All these deeply held beliefs will have to be rethought. Or will they? Parents must matter, you tell yourself. Besides, even if peers exert so much influence on a child, isn't it the parents who essentially choose a child's peers? Isn't that why parents agonize over the right neighborhood, the right school, the right circle of friends? Still, the question of how much parents matter is a good one. It's also terribly complicated. In determining a parent's influence, which dimension of the child are we measuring? His personality, his school grades, his moral behavior, his creative abilities, his salary as an adult, and what weight should we assign each of the many inputs that affect a child's outcome? Genes, family environment, socioeconomic level, schooling, discrimination, luck, illness, and so on. For the sake of argument, let's consider the story of two boys, one white and one black. The white boy is raised in a Chicago suburb by parents who read widely and involve themselves in school reform. His father, who has a decent manufacturing job, often takes the boy on nature hikes. His mother is a housewife who will eventually go back to college and earn a bachelor's degree in education. The boy is happy and performs very well in school. His teachers think he may be a bona fide math genius. His parents encourage him and are terribly proud when he skips a grade in school. He has an adoring younger brother who is also very bright. The family even holds literary salons in their home. The black boy is born in Daytona Beach, Florida, and his mother abandons him at the age of two. His father has a good job in sales but is a heavy drinker. He often beats a little boy with the metal end of a garden hose. One night when the boy is 11, he is decorating a tabletop Christmas tree, the first one he's ever had, when his father starts beating up a lady friend in the kitchen. He hits her so hard that some teeth fly out of her mouth and land at the base of the boy's Christmas tree. But the boy knows better than to speak up. At school, he makes no effort whatsoever. Before long, he's selling drugs, mugging suburbanites, carrying a gun. He makes sure to be asleep by the time his father comes home from drinking and to be out of the house before his father awakes. The father eventually goes to jail for sexual assault. By the age of 12, the boy is essentially fending for himself. You don't have to believe in obsessive parenting to think that the second boy doesn't stand a chance and that the first boy has it made. What are the odds that the second boy, with the added handicap of racial discrimination, will turn out to lead a productive life? What are the odds that the first boy, so deftly primed for success, will somehow fail? And how much of his fate should each boy attribute to his parents? One could theorize forever about what makes a perfect parent. For two reasons, the authors of this book will not do so. The first is that neither of us professes to be a parenting expert, although between us we do have six children under the age of five. The second is that we are less persuaded by parenting theory than by what the data have to say. Certain facets of a child's outcome, personality, for instance, or creativity, are not easily measured by data. But school performance is. And since most parents would agree that education lies at the core of a child's formation, it would make sense to begin by examining a telling set of school data. These data concern school choice, an issue that most people feel strongly about in one direction or another. True believers of school choice argue that their tax dollars buy them the right to send their children to the best school possible. Critics worry that school choice will leave behind the worst students in the worst schools. Still, just about every parent seems to believe that her child will thrive if only he can attend the right school, the one with an appropriate blend of academics, extracurriculars, friendliness, and safety. School choice came early to the Chicago public school system. That's because the CPS, like most urban districts, had a disproportionate number of minority students. Despite the US Supreme Court's 1954 ruling in Brown versus the Board of Education of Topeka, which dictated that schools be desegregated, many black CPS students continued to attend schools that were nearly all black. So, in 1980, the US Department of Justice and the Chicago Board of Education teamed up to try to better integrate the city's schools. It was decreed that incoming freshmen could apply to virtually any school in the district. Aside from its longevity, there are several reasons the CPS school choice program is a good one to study. It offers a huge data set. Chicago has a third largest school system in the country, after New York and Los Angeles, as well as an enormous amount of choice, more than 60 high schools, and flexibility. Its take-up rates are accordingly very high, with roughly half of the CPS students opting out of their neighborhood school. But the most serendipitous aspect of the CPS program, for the sake of a study at least, is how the school choice game was played. As might be expected.