wisdoms rather than reinforcing them. And concerning Stetson Kennedy, the most conventional wisdom of all is his reputation as a Klan infiltrator. There is also the fact that in our work we make a point of depending less on anecdote in favor of data, the idea being that numbers tend to lie less baldly than people do. But the story of Stetson Kennedy was one long series of anecdotes which, no matter how many times they were cited over the decades, were nearly all generated by the same self-interested source. Perhaps Kennedy's long life of fighting the good fight is all that matters. Perhaps, to borrow Peggy Bulger's phraseology, a goal of cultural advocacy calls for the use of applied folklore rather than the sort of forthrightness that should be more typical of history or journalism. One thing that does remain true is that Kennedy was certainly a master of information asymmetry. Until, that is, the data caught up with him. Filling in the Tax Gap. Why Americans Should Be Clamoring for the IRS to Do More Audits, Not Fewer. From the New York Times Magazine, April 2nd, 2006. This is a time of year when American citizens inevitably think about the Internal Revenue Service and, also inevitably, about how deeply they hate it. But most people who hate the IRS probably do so for the wrong reasons. They think it is a tough and cruel agency. But, in fact, it is not nearly as tough and cruel as it should be. The first thing to remember is that the IRS doesn't write the tax code. The agency is quick to point its finger at the true villain. In the United States, the Congress passes tax laws and requires taxpayers to comply, its mission statement says. The IRS role is to help the large majority of compliant taxpayers with the tax law while ensuring that the minority who are unwilling to comply pay their fair share. So, the IRS is like a street cop or, more precisely, the biggest fleet of street cops in the world who are asked to enforce laws written by a few hundred people on behalf of a few hundred million people, a great many of whom find these laws too complex, too expensive, and unfair. And yet, most Americans say they're proud to pay their taxes. In an independent poll conducted last year for the IRS Oversight Board, 96% of the respondents agreed with this statement. It is every American's civic duty to pay their fair share of taxes. And 93% agreed that everyone, quote, who cheats on their taxes should be held accountable. On the other hand, when asked what influences their decision to report and pay taxes honestly, 62% answered fear of an audit, while 68% said it was the fact that their income was already being reported to the IRS by third parties. For all the civic duty floating around, it would seem that most compliance is determined by good old-fashioned incentives. So, which of these incentives work and which do not? To find out, the IRS conducted the National Research Program, a three-year study during which 46,000 randomly selected 2001 tax returns were intensively reviewed. The IRS doesn't specify what these 46,000 people were subjected to, but it may well have been the kind of inquisition that has earned the agency its hard reputation. Using this sample, the study found a tax gap, the difference between taxes owed and taxes actually paid, of $345 billion, or nearly one-fifth of all taxes collected by the IRS. This sum happens to be just a few billion dollars less than the projected federal budget deficit for 2007. It also amounts to more than $1,000 worth of cheating by every man, woman, and child in the US. But most people aren't cheating, and when you take a look at who does cheat and who doesn't, it becomes pretty clear just why people pay their taxes at all. The key statistic in the IRS's study is called the net misreporting percentage. It measures the amount that was misreported on every major line item on those 46,000 returns. In the wages, salaries, and tips category, for instance, Americans are underreporting only 1% of their actual income. Meanwhile, in the non-farm proprietor income category, think of self-employed workers like a restaurateur or the boss of a small construction crew, 57% of the income goes unreported. That's $68 billion in unpaid taxes right there. Why such a huge difference between the wage earner and a restaurateur? Simple. The only person reporting the restaurateur's income to the IRS is the restaurateur himself. For the wage earner, his employer is generating a W-2 to let the IRS know exactly how much he has been paid, and the wage earner's taxes are automatically withheld from every check, while the restaurateur has all year to decide if and how much he will pay. Does this mean that the average self-employed worker is less honest than the average wage earner? Not necessarily. It's just that he has much more incentive to cheat. He knows that the only chance the IRS has of learning his true income and expenditures is to audit him. And all he has to do is look at the IRS's infinitesimal audit rate. Last year, the agency conducted face-to-face audits on just 0.19% of all individual taxpayers to feel pretty confident to go ahead and cheat. So why do people really pay their taxes? Because it's the right thing to do? Or because they fear getting caught if they don't? It sure seems to be the latter. A combination of good technology, employer reporting and withholding, and poor logic—most people who don't cheat radically overestimate their chances of being audited—makes the system work. And while it sounds bad to hear that Americans underpay their taxes by nearly one-fifth, the tax economist Joel Slemrod estimates that the US is easily within the upper tier of worldwide compliance rates. Still, unless you are personally cheating by one-fifth or more, you should be mad at the IRS. Not because it's too vigilant, but because it's not nearly vigilant enough. Why should you pay your fair share when the agency lets a few hundred billion dollars of other people's money go uncollected every year? The IRS itself would love to change this dynamic. In the past few years, it has significantly increased its enforcement revenue and its audit rate, despite a budget that is only fractionally larger. A main task of any IRS commissioner—the current one is Mark Everson—is to beg Congress and the White House for resources. For all the obvious appeal of having the IRS collect every dollar owed to the government, it is just as obviously unappealing for most politicians to advocate a more vigorous IRS. Michael Dukakis tried this during his 1988 presidential campaign and, well, it didn't work. Left to enforce a tax code that no one likes upon a public that knows it can practically cheat at will, the IRS does its best to fiddle around the edges. Once in a while, it hits pay dirt. In the early 1980s, an IRS research officer in Washington named John Selagi had seen enough random audits to know that some taxpayers were incorrectly claiming dependents for the sake of an exemption. Sometimes it was a genuine mistake—a divorced wife and husband making duplicate claims on their children, for instance—and sometimes the claims were comically fraudulent. Selagi recalls at least one dependent's name listed as Fluffy, who is quite obviously a pet rather than a child. Selagi decided that the most efficient way to clean up this mess was to simply require taxpayers to list their children's social security numbers. Initially, there was a lot of resistance to the idea, says Selagi, now 66 and retired to Florida. The answer I got was that it was too much like 1984. The idea never made its way out of the agency. A few years later, however, with Congress clamoring for more tax revenue, Selagi's idea was dug up, rushed forward, and put into law for tax year 1986. When the returns started coming in the following April, Selagi recalls, he and his bosses were shocked. Seven million dependents had suddenly vanished from the tax rolls—some incalculable combination of real pets and phantom children. Selagi's clever twist generated nearly three billion dollars in revenues in a single year. Selagi's immediate bosses felt he should get some kind of reward for his idea, but their superiors weren't convinced. So Selagi called his congressman, who got the reward process back on track. Finally, five years after his brainstorm became the law, Selagi, who earned about $80,000 annually at the time, was given a check for $25,000. By this point, his idea had generated roughly 14 billion dollars in revenue, which suggests at least one legitimate reason to dislike the IRS. If the agency hadn't been so stingy with Selagi's reward back then, it probably would have attracted a lot more of the anti-cheating wizards it really needs today. This recording was produced and directed by Rick Harris. It was edited by Valerie Raytron and Fred Koch. It was mixed and mastered by Richard Romaniello and Lance Neal. We hope you've enjoyed this program from Harper Audio. For more information about the broad range of titles from Harper Audio, Harper Children's Audio, and Cadman, please visit our website at HarperAudio.com. Thank you for listening. Audible hopes you have enjoyed this program.