and college students. The police killed dozens of them. One of the opposition leaders, a 41-year-old professor, later said that it was his 13-year-old daughter who insisted he attend the protest, despite his fear. What is most interesting, he said, is that we learned not to be afraid from our children. Most were aged 13 to 20. A few days after the massacre in Timișoara, Ceaușescu gave a speech in Bucharest before 100,000 people. Again the young people were out in force. They shouted down Ceaușescu with cries of Timișoara and down with the murderers. His time had come. He and Elena tried to escape the country with $1 billion, but they were captured, given a crude trial, and, on Christmas Day, executed by firing squad. Of all the communist leaders deposed in the years bracketing the collapse of the Soviet Union, only Nicolae Ceaușescu met a violent death. It should not be overlooked that his demise was precipitated in large measure by the youth of Romania, a great number of whom, were it not for his abortion ban, would never have been born at all. The story of abortion in Romania might seem an odd way to begin telling the story of American crime in the 1990s, but it's not. In one important way, the Romanian abortion story is a reverse image of the American crime story. The point of overlap was on that Christmas Day of 1989, when Nicolae Ceaușescu learned the hard way, with a bullet to the head, that his abortion ban had much deeper implications than he knew. On that day, crime was just about at its peak in the United States. In the previous 15 years, violent crime had risen 80%. It was crime that led the nightly news and the national conversation. When the crime rate began falling in the early 1990s, it did so with such speed and suddenness that it surprised everyone. It took some experts many years to even recognize that crime was falling, so confident had they been of its continuing rise. Long after crime had peaked, in fact, some of them continued to predict ever darker scenarios. But the evidence was irrefutable. The long and brutal spike in crime was moving in the opposite direction, and it wouldn't stop until the crime rate had fallen back to the levels of 40 years earlier. Now the experts to explain their faulty forecasting. The criminologist James Alan Fox explained that his warning of a bloodbath was in fact an intentional overstatement. I never said there would be blood flowing in the streets, he said, but I used strong terms like bloodbath to get people's attention, and it did. I don't apologize for using alarmist terms. If Fox seems to be offering a distinction without a difference, bloodbath versus blood flowing in the streets, we should remember that even in retreat mode, experts can be self-serving. After the relief had settled in, after people remembered how to go about their lives without the pressing fear of crime, there arose a natural question. Just where did all those criminals go? At one level, the answer seemed puzzling. After all, if none of the criminologists, police officials, economists, politicians, or others who traffic in such matters had foreseen the crime decline, how could they suddenly identify its causes? But this diverse army of experts now marched out a phalanx of hypotheses to explain the drop in crime. A great many newspaper articles would be written on the subject. Their conclusions often hinged on which expert had most recently spoken to which reporter. Here, ranked by frequency of mention, are the crime drop explanations cited in articles published from 1991 to 2001 in the 10 largest circulation papers in the LexisNexis database. Crime drop explanation number one, innovative policing strategies. Number of citations, 52. Explanation number two, increased reliance on prisons, 47 citations. Number three, changes in crack and other drug markets, 33 citations. Number four, aging of the population, 32 citations. Number five, tougher gun control laws, 32 citations. Number six, a strong economy, 28 citations. Number seven, increased number of police, 26 citations. And number eight, all other explanations, including increased use of capital punishment, concealed weapons laws, gun buybacks, and others, 34 citations. If you are the sort of person who likes guessing games, you may wish to spend the next few moments pondering which of these explanations seem to have merit and which don't. Hint, of the seven major explanations on the list, only three can be shown to have contributed to the drop in crime. The others are, for the most part, figments of someone's imagination, self-interest, or wishful thinking. Further hint, one of the greatest measurable causes of the crime drop does not appear on the list at all, for it didn't receive a single newspaper mention. Let's begin with a fairly uncontroversial one, the strong economy. The decline in crime that began in the early 1990s was accompanied by a blistering national economy and a significant drop in unemployment. It might seem to follow that the economy was a hammer that helped beat down crime, but a closer look at the data destroys this theory. It is true that a stronger job market may make certain crimes relatively less attractive, but that is only the case for crimes with a direct financial motivation, burglary, robbery, and auto theft, as opposed to violent crimes like homicide, assault, and rape. Moreover, studies have shown that an unemployment decline of one percentage point accounts for a 1% drop in nonviolent crime. During the 1990s, the unemployment rate fell by two percentage points. Nonviolent crime, meanwhile, fell by 40%. But an even bigger flaw in the strong economy theory concerns violent crime. Homicide fell at a greater rate during the 1990s than any other sort of crime, and a number of reliable studies have shown virtually no link between the economy and violent crime. This weak link is made even weaker by glancing back to a recent decade, the 1960s, when the economy went on a wild growth spurt, and so did violent crime. So, while a strong 1990s economy might have seemed, on the surface, a likely explanation for the drop in crime, it almost certainly didn't affect criminal behavior in any significant way. Unless, that is, the economy is construed in a broader sense, as a means to build and maintain hundreds of prisons. Let's now consider another crime drop explanation, increased reliance on prisons. It might help to start by flipping this crime question around. Instead of wondering what made fall, think about this. Why had it risen so dramatically in the first place? During the first half of the 20th century, the incidence of violent crime in the United States was, for the most part, fairly steady. But in the early 1960s, it began to climb. In retrospect, it's clear that one of the major factors pushing this trend was a more lenient justice system. Conviction rates declined during the 1960s, and criminals who were convicted served shorter sentences. This trend was driven in part by an expansion in the rights of people accused of crimes, a long overdue expansion, some would argue. Others would argue that the expansion went too far. At the same time, politicians were growing increasingly softer on crime, quote, for fear of sounding racist, as the economist Gary Becker has written, quote, since African Americans and Hispanics commit a disproportionate share of felonies. So, if you were the kind of person who might want to commit a crime, the incentives were lining up in your favor. A slimmer likelihood of being convicted, and if convicted, a shorter prison term. Because criminals respond to incentives as readily as anyone, the result was a surge in crime. It took some time and a great deal of political turmoil, but these incentives were eventually curtailed. Criminals who would have previously been set free for drug-related offenses and parole revocation in particular, were instead locked up. Between 1980 and 2000, there was a 15-fold increase in the number of people sent to prison on drug charges. Many other sentences, especially for violent crime, were lengthened. The total effect was dramatic. By 2000, more than 2 million people were in prison, roughly four times the number as of 1972. Fully half of that increase took place during the 1990s. The evidence linking increased punishment with lower crime rates is very strong. Harsh prison terms have been shown to act as both a deterrent for the would-be criminal on the street, and a prophylactic for the would-be criminal who's already locked up. Logical as this may sound, some criminologists have fought the logic. A 1977 academic study called On Behalf of a Moratorium on Prison Construction noted that crime rates tend to be high when imprisonment rates are high, and concluded that crime would fall if imprisonment rates could only be lowered. Fortunately, jailers did not suddenly turn loose their wards and sit back waiting for As the political scientist John J. DiIulio Jr. later commented, apparently, it takes a PhD in criminology to doubt that keeping dangerous criminals incarcerated cuts crime. The moratorium argument rests on a fundamental confusion of correlation and causality. Consider a parallel argument. The mayor of a city sees that his citizens celebrate wildly when their team wins the World Series. He is intrigued by this correlation, but, like the moratorium author, fails to see the direction in which the correlation runs. So, the following year, the mayor decrees that his citizens start celebrating the World Series before the first pitch is thrown, an act that, in his confused mind, will ensure a victory. There are plenty of reasons to dislike the huge surge in the prison population. Not everyone is pleased that such a significant fraction of Americans, especially black Americans, live behind bars. Nor does prison even begin to address the root causes of crime, which are diverse and complex. Lastly, prison is hardly a cheap solution. It costs about $25,000 a year to keep someone incarcerated. But, if the goal here is to explain the drop in crime in the 1990s, imprisonment is certainly one of the key answers. It accounts for roughly one-third of the drop in crime. Another crime drop explanation is often cited in tandem with imprisonment—the increased use of capital punishment. The number of executions in the United States quadrupled between the 1980s and the 1990s, leading many people to conclude, in the context of a debate that has been going on for decades, that capital punishment helped drive down crime. Lost in this however, are two important facts. First, given the rarity with which executions are carried out in this country and the long delays in doing so, no reasonable criminal should be deterred by the threat of execution. Even though capital punishment quadrupled within a decade, there were still only 478 executions in the entire United States during the 1990s. Any parent who has ever said to a recalcitrant child, okay, I'm going to count to 10 and this time I'm really going to punish you, knows the difference between deterrent and empty threat. New York State, for instance, has not, as of this recording, executed a single criminal since reinstituting its death penalty in 1995. Even among prisoners on death row, the annual execution rate is only 2%, compared with a 7% annual chance of dying faced by a member of the Black Gangster Disciple Nation crack gang. If life on death row is safer than life on the streets, it's hard to believe that the fear of execution is a driving force in a criminal's calculus. Like the $3 fine for late arriving parents at the Israeli daycare centers, the negative incentive of capital punishment simply isn't serious enough for a criminal to change his behavior. The second flaw in the capital punishment argument is even more obvious. Assume for a moment that the death penalty is a deterrent. How much crime does it actually deter? The economist Isaac Ehrlich, in an oft-cited 1975 paper, put forth an estimate that is generally considered optimistic. He said that executing one criminal translates into seven fewer homicides that the criminal might have committed. Now do the math. In 1991, there were 14 executions in the United States. In 2001, there were 66. According to Ehrlich's calculation, those 52 additional executions would have accounted for 364 fewer homicides in 2001. Not a small drop, to be sure, but less than 4% of the actual decrease in homicides that year. So even in a death penalty advocate's best-case scenario, capital punishment could explain only 1 25th of the drop in homicides in the 1990s. And because the death penalty is rarely given for crimes other than homicide, its deterrent effect cannot account for a speck of decline in other violent crimes. It is extremely unlikely, therefore, that the death penalty, as currently practiced in the United States, exerts any real influence on crime rates. Even many of its one-time supporters have come to this conclusion. I feel morally and intellectually obligated simply to concede that the death penalty experiment has failed, said U.S. Supreme Court Justice Harry A. Blackmun in 1994, nearly 20 years after he had voted for its reinstatement. I no longer shall tinker with the machinery of death. So it wasn't capital punishment that drove crime down, nor was it the booming economy, but higher rates of imprisonment did have a lot to do with it. All those criminals didn't march into jail by themselves, of course. Someone had to investigate the crime, catch the bad guy, and put together the case that would get him convicted, which naturally leads to a related pair of crime drop explanations, innovative policing strategies, and increased number of police. Let's address the second one first. The number of police officers per capita in the United States rose about 14% during the 1990s. Does merely increasing the number of police, however, reduce crime? The answer would seem obvious, yes, but proving that answer isn't so easy. That's because when crime is rising, people clamor for protection, and invariably more money is found for cops. So if you just look at raw correlations between police and crime, you will find that when there are more police, there tends to be more crime. That doesn't mean, of course, that the police are causing the crime, just as it doesn't mean, as some criminologists have argued, that crime will fall if criminals are released from prison. To show causality, we need a scenario in which more police are hired for reasons completely unrelated to rising crime. If, for instance, police were randomly sprinkled in some cities and not in others, we could look to see whether crime declines in the cities where the police happen to land. As it turns out, that exact scenario is often created by vote-hungry politicians. In the months leading up to Election Day, incumbent mayors routinely try to lock up the law-and-order vote by hiring more police, even when the crime rate is standing still. So by comparing the crime rate in one set of cities that have recently had an election, and which therefore hired extra police, with another set of cities that had no election, and therefore no extra police, it's possible to tease out the effect of the extra police on crime. The answer? Yes, indeed, additional police substantially lower the crime rate. Again, it may help to look backward and see why crime had risen so much in the first place. From 1960 to 1985, the number of police officers fell more than 50% relative to the number of crimes. In some cases, hiring additional police was considered a violation of the era's aesthetic. In others, it was simply considered too expensive. This 50% decline in police translated into a roughly equal decline in the probability that a given criminal would be caught. Coupled with the earlier mentioned leniency in the other half of the criminal justice system, the courtrooms, this decrease in policing created a strong positive incentive for criminals. By the 1990s, philosophies and necessities had changed. The policing trend was put in reverse with wide-scale hiring in cities across the country. Not only did all those police act as a deterrent, but they also provided the manpower to imprison criminals who might have otherwise gone uncaught. The hiring of additional police accounted for roughly 10% of the 1990s crime drop. But it wasn't only the number that changed in the 1990s. Consider the most commonly cited crime drop explanation of all, innovative policing strategies. There was perhaps no more attractive theory than the belief that smart policing stops crime. It offered a set of bona fide heroes rather than simply a dearth of villains. This theory rapidly became an article of faith because it appealed to the factors that, according to John Kenneth Galbraith, most contribute to the formation of conventional wisdom, the ease with which an idea may be understood, and the degree to which it affects our personal well-being. The story played out most dramatically in New York City, where newly elected Mayor Rudolph Giuliani and his hand-picked police commissioner, William Bratton, vowed to fix the city's desperate crime situation. Bratton took a novel approach to policing. He ushered the NYPD into what one senior police official later called our Athenian period, in which new ideas were given weight over calcified practices.