Now the eight factors that aren't correlated. The child's family is intact. The child's parents recently moved into a better neighborhood. The child's mother didn't work between birth and kindergarten. The child attended Head Start. The child's parents regularly take him to museums. The child is regularly spanked. The child frequently watches television. The child's parents read to him nearly every day. Now two by two. This one matters. The child has highly educated parents. And this one doesn't matter. The child's family is intact. A child whose parents are highly educated typically does well in school. Not much surprise there. A family with a lot of schooling tends to value schooling. Perhaps more important, parents with higher IQs tend to get more education, and IQ is strongly hereditary. But whether a child's family is intact doesn't seem to matter. Just as the earlier cited studies show that family structure has little impact on a child's personality, it does not seem to affect his academic abilities either. This is not to say that families ought to go around splitting up willy-nilly. It should, however, offer encouragement to the roughly 20 million American schoolchildren being raised by a single parent. This one matters. The child's parents have high socioeconomic status. And doesn't matter. The child's parents recently moved into a better neighborhood. A high socioeconomic status is strongly correlated to higher test scores, which seems sensible. Socioeconomic status is a strong indicator of success in general. It suggests a higher IQ and more education. And successful parents are more likely to have successful children. But moving to a better neighborhood doesn't improve a child's chances in school. It may be that moving itself is a disruptive force. More likely it's because a nicer house doesn't improve math or reading scores any more than nicer sneakers make you jump higher. This one matters. The child's mother was 30 or older at the time of her first child's birth. And doesn't matter. The child's mother didn't work between birth and kindergarten. A woman who doesn't have her first child until she's at least 30 is likely to see that child do well in school. This mother tends to be a woman who wanted to get some advanced education or develop traction in her career. She is also likely to want a child more than a teenage mother wants a child. This doesn't mean that an older first-time mother is necessarily a better mother, but she has put herself and her children in a more advantageous position. It's worth noting that this advantage is non-existent for a teenage mother who waits until she is 30 to have her second child. The ECLS data show that her second child will perform no better than her first. At the same time, a mother who stays home from work until her child goes to kindergarten does not seem to provide any advantage. Obsessive parents might find this lack of correlation bothersome. What was the point of all those mommy and me classes? But that is what the data tell us. This one matters. The child had low birth weight. And doesn't matter, the child attended Head Start. A child who had a low birth weight tends to do poorly in school. It may be that being born prematurely is simply hurtful to a child's overall well-being. It may also be that low birth weight is a strong forecaster of poor parenting, since a mother who smokes or drinks or otherwise mistreats her baby in utero isn't likely to turn things around just because the baby is born. A low birth weight child, in turn, is more likely to be a poor child, and therefore more likely to attend Head Start, the federal preschool program. But according to the ECLS data, Head Start does nothing for a child's future test scores. Despite a deep reservoir of appreciation for Head Start, one of this book's authors was a charter student. We must acknowledge that it has repeatedly been proven ineffectual. Here's a likely reason. Instead of spending the day with his own undereducated, overworked mother, the typical Head Start child spends a day with someone else's undereducated, overworked mother, and a whole roomful of similarly needy children. As it happens, fewer than 30% of Head Start teachers have even a bachelor's degree, and The job pays so poorly—about $21,000 for a Head Start teacher versus $40,000 for the average public school kindergarten teacher—that it is unlikely to attract better teachers anytime soon. This one matters. The child's parents speak English in the home. And doesn't matter. The child's parents regularly take him to museums. A child with English-speaking parents does better in school than one whose parents don't speak English. Again, not much of a surprise. This correlation is further supported by the performance of Hispanic students in the ECLS study. As a group, Hispanic students test poorly. They are also disproportionately likely to have non-English-speaking parents. They do, however, tend to catch up with their peers in later grades. So how about the opposite case? What if a mother and a father are not only proficient in English, but spend their weekends broadening their child's cultural horizons by taking him to museums? Sorry. Culture cramming may be a foundational belief of obsessive parenting, but the ECLS data show no correlation between museum visits and test scores. This one matters. The child is adopted. And doesn't matter. The child is regularly spanked. There is a strong correlation, a negative one, between adoption and school test scores. Why? Studies have shown that a child's academic abilities are far more influenced by the IQs of his biological parents than the IQs of his adoptive parents. And mothers who give up their children for adoption tend to have significantly lower IQs than the people who are doing the adopting. There is another explanation for low-achieving adoptees, which, though it may seem distasteful, jibes with the basic economic theory of self-interest. A woman who knows she will put her baby up for adoption may not take the same prenatal care as a woman who's keeping her baby. Consider, at the risk of furthering this distasteful thinking, how you treat a car you own versus a car you're renting for the weekend. But if an adopted child is prone to lower test scores, a spanked child is not. This may seem surprising, not because spanking itself is necessarily detrimental, but because conventionally speaking, spanking is considered an unenlightened practice. We might therefore assume that parents who spank are unenlightened in other ways. Perhaps that isn't the case at all, or perhaps there's a different spanking story to be told. Remember, the ECLS survey included direct interviews with the children's parents. So a parent would have to sit knee-to-knee with a government researcher and admit to spanking his child. This would suggest that a parent who does so is either unenlightened or, more interestingly, congenitally honest. It may be that honesty is more important to good parenting than spanking is to bad parenting. This one matters. The child's parents are involved in the PTA. And doesn't matter. The child frequently watches television. A child whose parents are involved in the PTA tends to do well in school, which probably indicates that parents with a strong relationship to education get involved in the PTA, not that their PTA involvement somehow makes their children smarter. The ECLS data show no correlation, meanwhile, between a child's test scores and the amount of television he watches. Despite the conventional wisdom, watching television apparently does not turn a child's brain to mush. In Finland, whose education system has been ranked the world's best, most children do not begin school until age seven, but have often learned to read on their own by watching American television with Finnish subtitles. Nor, however, does using a computer at home turn a child into Einstein. The ECLS data show no correlation between computer use and school test scores. Now, for the final pair of factors. This one matters. The child has many books in his home. And this one doesn't matter. The child's parents read to him nearly every day. As noted earlier, a child with many books in his home has indeed been found to do well on school tests. But regularly reading to a child doesn't affect test scores. This would seem to present a riddle. It bounces us back to our original question. Just how much and in what ways do parents really matter? Let's start with the positive correlation. Books in the home equal higher test scores. Most people would look at this correlation and infer an obvious cause and effect relationship. To wit, a little boy named Isaiah has a lot of books at home. Isaiah does beautifully on his reading test at school. This must be because his mother or father regularly reads to him. But Isaiah's friend Emily, who also has a lot of books in her home, practically never touches them. She would rather dress up her brats or watch cartoons. And Emily tests just as well as Isaiah. Meanwhile, Isaiah and Emily's friend Ricky doesn't have any books at home. But Ricky goes to the library every day with his mother. Ricky is a reading fiend. And yet he does worse on his school tests than either Emily or Isaiah. What are we to make of this? If reading books doesn't have an impact on early childhood test scores, could it be that the books' mere physical presence in the house makes the children smarter? Do books perform some kind of magical osmosis on a child's brain? If so, one might be tempted to simply deliver a truckload of books to every home that contains a preschooler. That in fact is what the governor of Illinois tried to do. In early 2004, Governor Rod Blagojevich announced a plan to mail one book a month to every child in Illinois from the time they were born until they entered kindergarten. The plan would cost $26 million a year. But Blagojevich argued, this was a vital intervention in a state where 40% of third graders read below their grade level. When you own books and they're yours, he said, and they just come as part of your life, all of that will contribute to a sense that books should be a part of your life. So all children born in Illinois would end up with a 60-volume library by the time they entered school. Does this mean they would all perform better on their reading tests? Probably not. Although we may never know for sure, in the end, the Illinois legislature rejected the book plan. After all, the ECLS data doesn't say that books in the house cause high test scores. It says only that the two are correlated. So how should this correlation be interpreted? Here's a likely theory. Most parents who buy a lot of children's books tend to be smart and well-educated to begin with, and they pass on their smarts and work ethic to their kids. Or perhaps they care a great deal about education and about their children in general, which means that they create an environment that encourages and rewards learning. Such parents may believe, as fervently as the governor of Illinois believed, that every children's book is a talisman that leads to unfettered intelligence. But they are probably wrong. A book is in fact less a cause of intelligence than an indicator. So what does all this have to say about the importance of parents in general? Consider again the eight ECLS factors that are correlated with school test scores, negatively or positively. The child has highly educated parents. The child's parents have high socioeconomic status. The child's mother was 30 or older at the time of her first child's birth. The child had low birth weight. The child's parents speak English in the home. The child is adopted. The child's parents are involved in the PTA. And the child has many books in his home. And now, again, the eight factors that were not correlated. The child's family is intact. The child's parents recently moved into a better neighborhood. The child's mother didn't work between birth and kindergarten. The child attended Head Start. The child's parents regularly take him to museums. The child is regularly spanked. The child frequently watches television. And the child's parents read to him nearly every day. To overgeneralize a bit, the first list describes things that parents are. The second list describes things that parents do. Parents who are well-educated, successful, and healthy tend to have children who test well in school. But it doesn't seem to much matter whether a child is trotted off to museums or spanked or sent to Head Start or frequently read to or plopped in front of the television. For parents and parenting experts who are obsessed with child-rearing technique, this may be sobering news. The reality is that technique looks to be highly overrated. But this is not to say that parents don't matter. Plainly, they matter a great deal. Here is the conundrum. By the time most people pick up a parenting book, it's far too late. Most of the things that matter were decided long ago. Who you are, whom you married, what kind of life you lead. If you are smart, hard-working, well-educated, well-paid, and married to someone equally fortunate, then your children are more likely to succeed. Nor does it hurt, in all likelihood, to be honest, thoughtful, loving, and curious about the world. But it isn't so much a matter of what you do as a parent. It's who you are. In this regard, an overbearing parent is a lot like a political candidate who believes that money wins elections, whereas, in truth, all the money in the world can't get a candidate elected if the voters don't like him to start with. In a paper titled The Nature and Nurture of Economic Outcomes, the economist Bruce Sasserdote addressed the nature-nurture debate by taking a long-term quantitative look at the effects of parenting. He used three adoption studies, two American and one British, each of them containing in-depth data about the adopted children, their adoptive parents, and their biological parents. Sasserdote found that parents who adopt children are typically smarter, better educated, and more highly paid than the baby's biological parents. But the adoptive parents' advantages had little bearing on the child's school performances. As also seen in the ECLS data, adopted children test relatively poorly in school. Any influence the adoptive parents might exert is seemingly outweighed by the force of genetics. But, Sasserdote found, the parents were not powerless forever. By the time the adopted children became adults, they had veered sharply from the destiny that IQ alone might have predicted. Compared to similar children who were not put up for adoption, the adoptees were far more likely to attend college, to have a well-paid job, and to wait until they were out of their teens before getting married. It was the influence of the adoptive parents, Sasserdote concluded, that made the difference. 6. Perfect Parenting Part 2, or, Would a Roshanda by Any Other Name Smell as Sweet? Obsessive or not, any parent wants to believe that she is making a big difference in the kind of person her child turns out to be. Otherwise, why bother? The belief in parental power is manifest in the first official act a parent commits, giving the baby a name. As any modern parent knows, the baby naming industry is booming as evidenced by a proliferation of books, websites, and baby name consultants. Many parents seem to believe that a child cannot prosper unless it is hitched to the right name. Names are seen to carry great aesthetic or even predictive powers. This might explain why, in 1958, a New York City man named Robert Lane decided to call his baby son, Winner. The Lanes, who lived in a housing project in Harlem, already had several children, each with a fairly typical name. But this boy, well, Robert Lane apparently had a special feeling about this one. Winner Lane. How could he fail with a name like that? Three years later, the Lanes had another boy, their seventh and last child. For reasons that no one can quite pin down today, Robert decided to name this boy, Loser. It doesn't appear that Robert was unhappy about the new baby. He just seemed to get a kick out of the name's bookend effect, first a winner, now a loser. But if Winner Lane could hardly be expected to fail, could Loser Lane possibly succeed? Loser Lane did, in fact, succeed. He went to prep school on a scholarship, graduated from Lafayette College in Pennsylvania, and joined the New York Police Department, this was his mother's longtime wish, where he made detective and eventually sergeant. Although he never hid his name, many people were uncomfortable using it. So, I have a bunch of names, he says today, from Jimmy to James to whatever they want to call you, Timmy, but they rarely call you Loser. Once in a while, he said, they throw a French twist on it, Lousier. To his police colleagues, he is known as Lou. And what of his brother with the can't-miss name? The most noteworthy achievement of Winner Lane, now in his mid-forties, is the sheer length of his criminal record, nearly three dozen arrests for burglary, domestic violence, trespassing, resisting arrest, and other mayhem. These days, Loser and Winner barely speak. The father who named them is no longer alive. Clearly, he had the right idea that naming is destiny, but he must have gotten the boys mixed up. Then there's the recent case of Temptress, a 15-year-old girl whose misdeeds landed her in Albany County Family Court in New York. The judge, W. Dennis Duggan, had long taken note of the strange names borne by some offenders. One teenage boy, Amcher, had been named for the first thing his parents saw upon reaching the hospital, the sign for Albany Medical Center Hospital Emergency Room, Amcher. But Duggan considered Temptress the most outrageous name he had come across. The judge later recalled, I sent her out of the courtroom so I could