Chapter 2. How is the Ku Klux Klan like a group of real estate agents? As institutions go, the Ku Klux Klan has had a markedly up-and-down history. It was founded in the immediate aftermath of the Civil War by six former Confederate soldiers in Pulaski, Tennessee. The six young men, four of whom were budding lawyers, saw themselves as merely a circle of like-minded friends. Thus the name they chose, Ku Klux, a slight mangling of kuklos, the Greek word for circle. In the beginning, their activities were said to be harmless midnight pranks, for instance, riding horses through the countryside while draped in white sheets and pillowcase hoods. But soon, the Klan evolved into a multi-state terrorist organization designed to frighten and kill emancipated slaves. Among its regional leaders were five former Confederate generals. Its staunchest supporters were the plantation owners for whom Reconstruction posed an economic and political nightmare. In 1872, President Ulysses S. Grant spelled out for the House of Representatives the true aims of the Ku Klux Klan. By force and terror, to prevent all political action not in accord with the views of the members, to deprive colored citizens of the right to bear arms and of the right of a free ballot, to suppress the schools in which colored children were taught, and to reduce the colored people to a condition closely allied to that of slavery. The early Klan did its work through pamphleteering, lynching, shooting, burning, castrating, pistol-whipping, and a thousand forms of intimidation. They targeted former slaves and any whites who supported the blacks' rights to acquire land, vote, or gain an education. But within barely a decade, the Klan had been extinguished, largely by legal and military interventions out of Washington, D.C. If the Klan itself was defeated, however, its aims had been largely achieved through the establishment of Jim Crow laws. Congress, which during Reconstruction had been quick to enact measures of legal, social, and economic freedom for blacks, just as quickly began to roll them back. The federal government agreed to withdraw its occupation troops from the South, allowing the restoration of white rule. In Plessy v. Ferguson, the U.S. Supreme Court gave the go-ahead to full-scale racial segregation. The Ku Klux Klan lay largely dormant until 1915, when D.W. Griffith's film The Birth of a Nation, originally titled The Klansmen, helped spark its rebirth. Griffith presented the Klan as crusaders for white civilization itself, one of the noblest forces in American history. The film quoted a line from A History of the American People, written by a renowned historian. At last there had sprung into existence a great Ku Klux Klan, a veritable empire of the South, to protect the southern country. The historian in question was U.S. President Woodrow Wilson, one-time scholar and president of Princeton University. By the 1920s, a revived Klan claimed 8 million members. This time around, the Klan was not confined to the South, but ranged throughout the country. This time around, it concerned itself not only with blacks, but also Catholics, Jews, communists, unionists, immigrants, agitators, and other disruptors of the status quo. In 1933, with Hitler ascendant in Germany, Will Rogers was the first to draw a line between the new Klan and the new threat in Europe. Papers all state Hitler is trying to copy Mussolini, he wrote. Looks to me like it's the Ku Klux that he's copying. The onset of World War II and a number of internal scandals once again laid the Klan low. Public sentiment turned against the Klan as the unity of a country at war trumped its message of separatism. But within a few years, there were already signs of a massive revival. As wartime anxiety gave way to post-war uncertainty, Klan membership flourished. Barely two months after V-J Day, the Klan in Atlanta burned a 300-foot-long cross on the face of Stone Mountain, the site of a storied rock carving of Robert E. Lee. The extravagant cross-burning, one Klansman later said, was intended, quote, just to let the niggers know the war is over and that the Klan is back on the market. Atlanta had by now become Klan headquarters. The Klan was thought to hold great sway with key Georgia politicians, and its Georgia chapters were said to include many policemen and sheriff's deputies. Yes, the Klan was a secret society, reveling in passwords and cloak-and-dagger ploys, but its real power lay in the very public fear that it fostered, exemplified by the open secret that the Ku Klux Klan and the law enforcement establishment were brothers in arms. Atlanta, the imperial city of the KKK's invisible empire, in Klan jargon, was also home to Stetson Kennedy, a 30-year-old man with the bloodlines of a Klansman, but a temperament that ran opposite. He came from a good Southern family which claimed ancestors including two signers of the Declaration of Independence, an officer in the Confederate Army, and John B. Stetson, founder of the famed Hat Company, and the man for whom Stetson University was named. Stetson Kennedy grew up in a 14-room house in Jacksonville, Florida, the youngest of five children. His uncle Brady was a Klansman, but Kennedy would go on to become a self-described dissident at large, writing countless articles and several books that railed against bigotry. He first worked as a folklorist, traveling around Florida to collect old native tales and songs. Years later, when he served as a rare white correspondent for the Pittsburgh Courier, the country's largest black newspaper, he wrote under the pseudonym of Daddy Mention, a black folk hero who, as the myth told it, could outrun the blast of a sheriff's shotgun. What drove Kennedy was a hatred of small-mindedness, ignorance, obstructionism, and intimidation, which, in his view, were displayed by no organization more proudly than the Ku Klux Klan. Kennedy saw the Klan as the terrorist arm of the white establishment itself. This struck him as an intractable problem for several reasons. The Klan was in cahoots with political, business, and law enforcement leaders. The public was frightened and felt powerless to act against the Klan. And the few anti-hate groups that existed at the time had little leverage or even information about the Klan. Almost all of the things written on the subject were editorials, not exposés, Kennedy would later explain. The writers were against the Klan, all right, but they had precious few inside facts about it. So Kennedy set out to gather those facts. He would spend years interviewing Klan leaders and sympathizers, sometimes taking advantage of his own background and lineage to pretend that he was on their side of the issues. He also attended public Klan events and, as he would later write, he even set about to infiltrate the Klan in Atlanta. The Klan Unmasked, Kennedy's memoir of his exploits inside the Klan, is in fact more of a novelization than a straight nonfiction account. Kennedy, a folklorist at heart, apparently wanted to put across the most dramatic story possible and therefore included not only his own anti-Klan activities, but those of another man who was codenamed John Brown. Brown was a union worker and a former Klan official who had changed his ways and offered to infiltrate the Klan. It was John Brown who apparently performed the most dramatic and dangerous episodes rendered in the Klan Unmasked, physically attending Klan meetings and other functions in Atlanta. But since Stetson Kennedy was the man who later wrote the book, he rendered Brown's actions as his own. Regardless, there was a great deal of information to be gleaned from this Brown-Kennedy collaboration. Brown divulged what he learned at the weekly Klan meetings, the identities of the Klan's local and regional leaders, their upcoming plans, the Klan's current rituals, passwords, and language. It was Klan custom, for instance, to append a KL to many words. Thus would two Klansmen hold a Klonversation in the local Klan Clavern. The secret Klan handshake was a left-handed, limp-wristed fish wiggle. When a traveling Klansman wanted to locate brethren in a strange town, he would ask for a Mr. Ayak. Ayak, A-Y-A-K, being code for, Are you a Klansman? He would hope to hear this response, Yes, and I also know a Mr. Akai, A-K-A-I, which was code for, A Klansman am I? Before long, John Brown was invited to join the Klavaliers, the Klan's secret police and so-called Flog Squad. For an infiltrator, this posed a particularly sticky problem. What would happen if he were called upon to inflict violence? But as it happened, a central tenet of life in the Klan, and of terrorism in general, is that most of the threatened violence never goes beyond the threat stage. Consider lynching, the Klan's hallmark sign of violence. Here, compiled by the Tuskegee Institute, are the decade-by-decade statistics on the lynching of blacks in the United States. In the 1890s, there were 1,111 lynchings. From 1900 to 1909, 791. From 1910 to 1919, 569. In the 1920s, 281. In the 1930s, 119. 1940s, 31. 1950s, 6. And the 1960s, 3. Bear in mind that these figures represent not only lynchings attributed to the Ku Klux Klan, but the total number of lynchings reported. These statistics reveal at least three noteworthy facts. The first is the obvious decrease in lynchings over time. The second is the absence of a correlation between lynchings and Klan membership. There were actually more lynchings of blacks between 1900 and 1909 when the Klan was dormant than during the 1920s when the Klan had millions of members, which suggests that the Ku Klux Klan carried out far fewer lynchings than is generally thought. Third, relative to the size of the black population, lynchings were exceedingly rare. To be sure, a single lynching is one too many. But by the turn of the century, lynchings were hardly the everyday occurrence that they are often considered in the public recollection. Compare the 281 victims of lynchings in the 1920s to the number of black infants who were dying at that time as a result of malnutrition, pneumonia, diarrhea, and the like. As of 1920, about 13 out of every 100 black children died in infancy, or roughly 20,000 children each year, compared to 28 people who were lynched in a year. As late as 1940, about 10,000 black infants died each year. What larger truths do these lynching figures suggest? What does it mean that lynchings were relatively rare and that they fell precipitously over time, even in the face of a boom in Klan membership? The most compelling explanation is that all those early lynchings worked. White racists, whether or not they belonged to the Ku Klux Klan, had through their actions and rhetoric developed a strong incentive scheme that was terribly clear and terribly frightening. If a black person violated the accepted code of behavior, whether by talking back to a bus driver or daring to try to vote, he knew he might well be punished, perhaps by death. And so, by the mid-1940s, when Stetson Kennedy was trying to bust up the Klan, it didn't really need to use as much violence. Many blacks, having long been told to behave like second-class citizens or else, simply obliged. One or two lynchings went a long way toward inducing docility among even a large group of people, for people respond strongly to strong incentives. And there are few incentives more powerful than the fear of random violence, which, in essence, is why terrorism is so effective. But if the Ku Klux Klan of the 1940s wasn't uniformly violent, what was it? The Klan that Stetson Kennedy wrote about was in fact a sorry fraternity of men, most of them poorly educated and with poor prospects who needed a place to vent and an excuse for occasionally staying out all night. That their fraternity engaged in quasi-religious chanting and oath-taking and hosanna-hailing, all of it top secret, just made it that much more appealing. Kennedy also found the Klan to be a slick money-making operation, at least for those near the top of the organization. Klan leaders had any number of revenue sources, thousands of dues-paying rank-and-file members, business owners who hired the Klan to scare off the unions or who paid the Klan protection money, Klan rallies that generated huge cash donations, even the occasional gun-running or moonshine operation. Then there were rackets like the Klan's Death Benefit Association, which sold insurance policies to Klan members and accepted only cash or personal checks made out to the Klan's Grand Dragon himself. And even though the Klan may not have been as deadly as generally thought, it was plenty violent and, perhaps worse, had ever greater designs on political influence. Kennedy was therefore eager to damage the Klan in any way he could. When he heard about Klan plans for a union-busting rally, he fed the information to a union friend. He passed along Klan information to the Assistant Attorney General of Georgia, an established Klan buster. After researching the Klan's corporate charter, Kennedy wrote to the governor of Georgia, suggesting the grounds upon which the charter should be revoked, that the Klan had been designated a non-profit, non-political organization, but Kennedy argued that it was clearly devoted to both profits and politics. The problem was that most of Kennedy's efforts weren't producing the desired effect. The Klan was so entrenched and broad-based that Kennedy felt as if he were tossing pebbles at a giant. And even if he could somehow damage the Klan in Atlanta, the hundreds of other chapters around the world would go untouched. Kennedy was supremely frustrated, and out of this frustration was born a new strategy. He had noticed one day a group of young boys playing some kind of a spy game in which they exchanged silly secret passwords. It reminded him of the Klan. Wouldn't it be nice, he thought, to get the Klan's passwords and the rest of its secrets into the hands of kids all across the country, and their parents, too? What better way to defang a secret society than to make public its most secret information? Instead of futilely attacking the Klan from the outside, what if he could somehow unleash all the secret inside information that John Brown was gathering from the Klan's weekly meetings? Between Brown's inside dope and everything that Kennedy had learned via his own investigations, he probably knew more Klan secrets than the average Klansman. Kennedy turned to the most powerful mass media of his day, radio. He began feeding Klan reports to the journalist Drew Pearson, whose Washington Merry-Go-Round program was heard by millions of adults every day, and to the producers of the Adventures of Superman radio show, which reached millions of children each night. He told them about Mr. Ayak and Mr. Akai, and he passed along overheated passages from the Klan's Bible, which was called the Kloran. Kennedy never did learn why a white Christian supremacist group would give its Bible essentially the same name as the holiest book of Islam. He explained to the radio producers the role of Klan officers in any local clavern. The Klaylef, or vice president, Klocard, lecturer, Kludd, chaplain, Klygrap, secretary, Klaby, treasurer, Kladd, conductor, Klo, inner guard, Klekster, outer guard, the Klocan, a five-member investigative committee, and the Klavaliers, whose leader was called the Chief Ass Terror. He spelled out the Klan hierarchy as it proceeded from the local to the national level. There was an exalted Cyclops and his twelve terrors, a great titan and his twelve furies, a grand dragon and his nine hydras, an imperial wizard and his fifteen genii. Kennedy also passed along all the information and gossip that John Brown gleaned by infiltrating the main Klan chapter, Nathan Bedford Forrest Clavern No. 1, Atlanta, realm of Georgia. During the war, the Adventures of Superman program had portrayed its hero fighting Hitler and Mussolini and Hirohito, but now he was in need of fresh villains. The Klan was a perfect target, and Superman turned his powers against them. Drew Pearson, meanwhile, an avowed Klan hater, began giving regular Klan updates on his radio show and then gave further updates based on John Brown's inside reports to show how the original updates were infuriating Klan officials. Pearson's work created an echo chamber that seemed to be driving Grand Dragon Samuel Green crazy. Here is Pearson's radio report from November 17, 1948. Speaking at Clavern No. 1, Atlanta, Georgia, the week after elections, the Grand Dragon wrung his hands and once again cautioned Klansmen to be careful about leaks. I have to talk frankly at these meetings, he said, but I might as well call Drew Pearson before I come to the meeting and give him the information. For the next day he gives it out to everybody from coast to coast. The AP and UP are both calling me about it next morning while I'm eating breakfast. The Grand Dragon spoke about plans for a big cross-burning to be held in Macon, Georgia, on December 10. It would be the biggest in Klan history, he said, and he expected 10,000 people.