as teens. So what became of the two boys? The second child, now 27 years old, is Roland G. Fryer Jr., the Harvard economist studying black underachievement. The white child also made it to Harvard, but soon after, things went badly for him. His name is Ted Kaczynski. Here now is some bonus material in the revised expanded edition of Freakonomics. The Probability that a Real Estate Agent is Cheating You and Other Riddles of Modern Life Inside the Curious Mind of the Heralded Young Economist Steven Levitt by Steven J. Dubner from the New York Times Magazine, August 3, 2003 The most brilliant young economist in America—the one so deemed, at least, by a jury of his elders—breaks to a stop at a traffic light on Chicago's South Side. It is a sunny day in mid-June. He drives an aging green Chevy Cavalier with a dusty dashboard and a window that doesn't quite shut, producing a dull roar at highway speeds. But the car's quiet for now, as are the noontime streets—gas stations, boundless concrete, brick buildings with plywood windows. An elderly homeless man approaches. It says he is homeless right on his sign, which also asks for money. He wears a torn jacket, too heavy for the warm day, and a grimy red baseball cap. The economist doesn't lock his doors or inch the car forward, nor does he go scrounging for spare change. He just watches, as if through one-way glass. After a while, the homeless man moves along. He had nice headphones, says the economist, still watching in the rearview mirror. Well, nicer than the ones I have. Otherwise, it doesn't look like he has many assets. Steven Levitt tends to see things differently than the average person—differently, too, than the average economist. This is either a wonderful trait or a troubling one, depending on how you feel about economists. The average economist is known to wax iracularly about any and all monetary issues. But if you were to ask Levitt his opinion of some standard economic matter, he would probably swipe the hair from his eyes and plead ignorance. I gave up a long time ago pretending that I knew stuff I didn't know, he says. I mean, I just don't know very much about the field of economics. I'm not good at math. I don't know a lot of econometrics. I also don't know how to do theory. If you ask me about whether the stock market is going to go up or down, if you ask me whether the economy is going to grow or shrink, if you ask me whether deflation is good or bad, if you ask me about taxes, I mean, it would be total fakery if I said I knew anything about any of those things. In Levitt's view, economics is a science with excellent tools for gaining answers, but a serious shortage of interesting questions. His particular gift is the ability to ask such questions. For instance, if drug dealers make so much money, why do they still live with their mothers? Which is more dangerous, a gun or a swimming pool? What really caused crime rates to plunge during the past decade? Do real estate agents have their clients' best interests at heart? Why do black parents give their children names that may hurt their career prospects? Do school teachers cheat to meet high-stakes testing standards? Is sumo wrestling corrupt? And how does a homeless man afford $50 headphones? Many people, including a fair number of his peers, might not recognize Levitt's work as economics at all, but he has merely distilled the so-called dismal science down to its most primal aim, explaining how people get what they want or need. Unlike most academics, he is unafraid of using personal observations and curiosities, though he is afraid of calculus. He is an intuitionist. He sifts through a pile of data to find a story that no one else had found. He devises a way to measure an effect that veteran economists had declared unmeasurable. His abiding interests, though he says he has never trafficked in them himself, are cheating, corruption, and crime. His interest in the homeless man's headphones, meanwhile, didn't last long. Maybe, he said later, it was just testimony to the fact that I'm too disorganized to buy a set of headphones that I myself covet. Levitt is the first to say that some of his topics border on the trivial, but he has proved to be such an ingenious researcher and clear-eyed thinker that instead of being consigned to the fringe of the field, the opposite has happened. He has shown other economists just how well their tools can make sense of the real world. Levitt is considered a demigod, one of the most creative people in economics and maybe in all social science, says Colin Kammerer, an economist at the California Institute of Technology. He represents something that everyone thinks they will be when they go to grad school in econ, but usually, they have the creative spark bored out of them by endless math, namely, a kind of intellectual detective trying to figure stuff out. Levitt is a populist in a field that is undergoing a bout of popularization. Undergraduates are swarming the economics departments of elite universities. Economics is seen as the ideal blend of intellectual prestige, it does offer Nobel after all, and practical training for a high-flying finance career, unless, like Levitt, you choose to stay in academia. At the same time, economics is ever more visible in the real world thanks to the continuing fetishization of the stock market and the continuing fixation with Alan Greenspan. The greatest change, however, is within the scholarly ranks. Micro-economists are gaining on the macro crowd, empiricists gaining on the theorists. Behavioral economists have called into doubt the very notion of homo economicus, the supposedly rational decision maker in each of us. Young economists of every stripe are more inclined to work on real world subjects and dip into bordering disciplines, psychology, criminology, sociology, even neurology, with the intent of rescuing their science from its slavish dependence upon mathematical models. Levitt fits everywhere and nowhere. He is a noetic butterfly that no one has pinned down. He was once offered a job on the Clinton economic team, and the Bush campaign approached him about being a crime advisor, but he's widely appreciated. Steve isn't really a behavioral economist, but they'd be happy to have him, says Austin Goolsbee, who teaches economics at the University of Chicago's Graduate School of Business. He's not really an old price theory guy, but these Chicago guys are happy to claim him too. He's not really a Cambridge guy, although Levitt went to Harvard and then MIT, but they'd love to have him come back. He has critics, to be sure. Daniel Hammermesh, a prominent labor economist at the University of Texas, has taught Levitt's paper, The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime, to his undergraduates. I've gone over this paper in draft, in its printed version at great length, and for the life of me, I can't see anything wrong with it, Hammermesh says. On the other hand, I don't believe a word of it. And his stuff on sumo wrestlers, well, this is not exactly fundamental, unless you're Japanese and weigh 500 pounds. But at 36, Levitt is a full professor in the University of Chicago's economics department, the most legendary program in the country. He received tenure after only two years. He is an editor of the Journal of Political Economy, a leading journal in the field, and the American Economic Association recently awarded Levitt its John Bates Clark Medal, given biannually to the country's best economist under 40. He's a prolific and diverse writer, but his paper linking a rise in abortion to a drop in crime has made more noise than the rest combined. Levitt and his co-author, John Donahue of Stanford Law School, argued that as much as 50% of the huge drop in crime since the early 1990s can be traced to Roe v. Wade. Their thinking goes like this, the women most likely to seek an abortion, poor, single, black, or teenage mothers, were the very women whose children, if born, have been shown most likely to become criminals. But since those children weren't born, crime began to decrease during the years they would have entered their criminal prime. In conversation, Levitt reduces this theory to a tidy syllogism. Unwantedness leads to high crime. Abortion leads to less unwantedness. Abortion leads to less crime. Levitt had already published widely about crime and punishment. One paper he wrote as a graduate student is still regularly cited. His question was disarmingly simple, do more police translate into less crime? The answer would seem obvious, yes, but had never been proved. Since the number of police officers tends to rise along with the number of crimes, the effectiveness of the police was tricky to measure. Levitt needed a mechanism that would unlink the crime rate from police hiring. He found it within politics. He noticed that mayors and governors running for re-election often hire more police officers. By measuring those police increases against crime rates, he was able to determine that additional officers do indeed bring down violent crime. That paper was later disputed. Another graduate student found a serious mathematical mistake in it, but Levitt's ingenuity was obvious. He began to be acknowledged as a master of the simple, clever solution. He was the guy who, in the slapstick scene, sees all the engineers futzing with a broken machine and then realizes that no one has thought to plug it in. Arguing that police helped deter crime didn't make Levitt any enemies. Arguing that abortion deterred crime was another matter. In the abortion paper, published in 2001, he and Donahue warned that their findings should not be seen, quote, as either an endorsement of abortion or a call for intervention by the state in the fertility decisions of women. They suggested that crime might just as easily be curbed by, in their words, providing better environments for those children at greatest risk for future crime. Still, the very topic managed to offend nearly everyone. Conservatives were enraged that abortion could be construed as a crime-fighting tool. Liberals were aghast that poor and black women were singled out. Economists grumbled that Levitt's methodology was not sound. A syllogism, after all, can be a magic trick. All cats die. Socrates died. Therefore, Socrates was a cat. I think he's enormously clever in so many areas, focusing very much on the issue of reverse causality, says Ted Joyce, an economist at Baruch College who has written a critical response to the abortion paper. But in this case, I think he ignored it or didn't tend to it well enough. As the news media gorged on the abortion crime story, Levitt came under direct assault. He was called an ideologue by conservatives and liberals alike, a eugenicist, a racist, and downright evil. In reality, he seems to be very much none of these. He has little taste for politics and less for moralizing. He's genial, low-key and unflappable, confident but not cocky, he is a respected teacher and colleague, he is a sought-after collaborator who, because of the breadth of his curiosities, often works with scholars outside his field, another rarity for an economist. I hesitate to use these words, but Steve is a con man in the best sense, says Sudhir Venkatesh, a sociologist at Columbia University. He's the Shakespearean jester. He'll make you believe his ideas were yours. Venkatesh was Levitt's co-author on An Economic Analysis of a Drug-Selling Gang's Finances, which found that the average street dealer lives with his mother because the take-home pay is, frankly, terrible. The paper analyzed one crack gang's financial activities as if it were any corporation. It was Venkatesh who procured the data from a former gang member. Such a thing had never been tried. This lack of focus, Levitt deadpanned in one version of the paper, is perhaps partly attributable to the fact that few economists have been involved in the study of gangs. Levitt speaks with a boyish lisp. His appearance is high nerd, a plain button-down shirt, nondescript khakis, an abraded belt, sensible shoes. His pocket calendar is branded with the National Bureau of Economic Research logo. I wish he would get more than three haircuts a year, his wife Jeanette says, and that he wasn't still wearing the same glasses he got 15 years ago, which weren't even in fashion then. He was a good golfer in high school, but has so physically atrophied that he calls himself the weakest human being alive, and he asks Jeanette to open jars around the house. There is nothing in his appearance or manner, in other words, that suggests a flamethrower. He will tell you that all he does is sit at his desk day and night wrestling with some strange mountain of data. He will tell you that he would do it free, his salary is reportedly more than $200,000, and you tend to believe him. He may be an accidental provocateur, but he's a provocateur nonetheless. He takes particular delight in catching wrongdoers. In one paper, he devised a set of algorithms that could identify teachers in the Chicago public school system who were cheating. Cheating classrooms will systematically differ from other classrooms along a number of dimensions. He and his co-author, Brian Jacob of the Kennedy School of Government, wrote in Catching Cheating Teachers. For instance, students in cheating classrooms are likely to experience unusually large test score gains in the year of the cheating, followed by unusually small gains or even declines in the following year when the boost attributable to cheating disappears. Levitt used test score data from the Chicago schools that had long been available to other researchers. There were a number of ways he realized that a teacher could cheat. If she were particularly brazen and stupid, she might just give students the correct answers. Or, after the test, she might actually erase students' wrong answers and fill in correct ones. A sophisticated cheater would be careful to avoid conspicuous blocks of identical answers, but Levitt was more sophisticated. The first step in analyzing suspicious strings is to estimate the probability each child would give a particular answer on each question, he wrote. This estimation is done using a multinomial logit framework with past test scores, demographics, and socioeconomic characteristics as explanatory variables. So, by measuring any number of factors, the difficulty of a particular question, the frequency with which students got hard questions right and easy ones wrong, the degree to which certain answers were highly correlated in one classroom, Levitt identified which teachers he thought were cheating. Perhaps just as valuable, he was also able to identify the good teachers. The Chicago school system, rather than disputing Levitt's findings, invited him into the schools for retesting. As a result, the cheaters were fired. So, then there is his forthcoming paper, Understanding Why Crime Fell in the 1990s, four factors that explain the decline and seven that do not. The entire drop in crime, Levitt says, was due to more police officers, more prisoners, the waning crack epidemic, and Roe v. Wade. One factor that probably didn't make a difference, he argues, was the innovative policing strategy trumpeted in New York by Rudolph Giuliani and William Bratton. I think, Levitt says, I'm pretty much alone in saying that. He comes from a Minneapolis family of high, if unusual, achievers. His father, a medical researcher, is considered a leading authority on intestinal gas. He bills himself as the man who gave status to flatus and class to gas. One of Levitt's great-uncles, Robert May, wrote Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer, the book, that is. Another great-uncle, Johnny Marks, later wrote the song. At Harvard, Levitt wrote his senior thesis on thoroughbred breeding and graduated summa cum laude. He is still obsessed with horse racing. He says he believes it is corrupt and has designed a betting system, the details of which he will not share, to take advantage of the corruption. He worked for two years as a management consultant before enrolling at MIT for a doctorate in economics. The MIT program was famous for its mathematical intensity. Levitt had taken exactly one math course as an undergraduate and had forgotten even that. During his first graduate class, he asked the student next to him about a formula on the board. Is there any difference between the derivative sign that's straight up and down and the curly one? You are in so much trouble, he was told. People wrote him off, recalls Austin Goolsbee, the Chicago economist who was then a classmate. They'd say, that guy has no future. Levitt set his own course. Other grad students stayed up all night working on problem sets, trying to make good grades. He stayed up researching and writing. My view was that the way you succeed in this profession is do you write great papers, he says, so I just started. Sometimes he would begin with a question. Sometimes it was a set of data that caught his eye. He spent one entire summer typing into his computer the results of years worth of congressional elections. Today, with so much information so easily available on the internet, Levitt complains that he can't get his students to input data at all. All he had was a vague curiosity about why incumbents were so often re-elected. Then he happened upon a political science book whose authors claimed that money wins elections, period. They were trying to explain election outcomes as a function of campaign expenditures, he recalls, completely ignoring the fact that contributors will only give money to challengers when they have a realistic chance of winning, and incumbents only spend a lot when they have a chance of losing. They convinced themselves this was the causal story, even though it's so obvious in retrospect that it's a spurious effect. Obvious at least to Levitt, within five minutes he had a vision of the paper he would write. It came to me, he says, in full bloom.