Every day, people struggling to survive, so you know, we just do what we can. We ain't got no choice, and if that means getting killed, well shit, it's what niggers do around here to feed their family. Venkatesh would move from one family to the next, washing their dinner dishes and sleeping on the floor. He bought toys for their children. He once watched a woman use her baby's bib to sop up the blood of a teenage drug dealer who was shot to death in front of Venkatesh. William Julius Wilson, back at the U of C, was having regular nightmares on Venkatesh's behalf. Over the years, the gang endured bloody turf wars and, eventually, a federal indictment. A member named Booty, who was one rank beneath JT, came to Venkatesh with a story. Booty was being blamed by the rest of the gang for bringing about the indictment, he told Venkatesh, and therefore suspected that he would soon be killed. He was right. But first, Booty wanted to do a little atoning. For all the gang's talk about how crack dealing didn't do any harm, they even liked to brag that it kept black money in the black community, Booty was feeling guilty. He wanted to leave behind something that somehow might benefit the next generation. He handed Venkatesh a stack of well-worn spiral notebooks, blue and black, the gang's colors. They represented a complete record of four years' worth of the gang's financial transactions. At JT's direction, the ledgers had been rigorously compiled. Sales, wages, dues, even the death benefits paid out to the families of murdered members. At first, Venkatesh didn't even want the notebooks. What if the feds found out he had them? Perhaps he'd be indicted, too. Besides, what was he supposed to do with the data? Despite his math background, he had long ago stopped thinking in numbers. Upon completing his graduate work at the University of Chicago, Venkatesh was awarded a three-year stay at Harvard's Society of Fellows. Its environment of sharp thinking and bonhomie, the walnut paneling, the sherry cart once owned by Oliver Wendell Holmes, delighted Venkatesh. He went so far as to become the Society's wine steward. And yet, he regularly left Cambridge, returning again and again to the crack gang in Chicago. This street-level research made Venkatesh something of an anomaly. Most of the other young fellows were dyed-in-the-tweed intellectuals who liked to pun in Greek. One of the Society's aims was to bring together scholars from various fields who might not otherwise have occasion to meet. Venkatesh soon encountered another anomalous young fellow, one who also failed the Society's stereotype. This one happened to be an economist who, instead of thinking grand macro thoughts, favored his own list of offbeat micro-curiosities. At the very top of his list was crime. And so, within ten minutes of their meeting, Sudhir Venkatesh told Steven Levitt about the spiral notebooks from Chicago, and they decided to collaborate on a paper. It would be the first time that such priceless financial data had fallen into an economist's hands, affording an unparalleled analysis of a heretofore uncharted criminal enterprise. So how did the gang work? An awful lot like most American businesses, actually, though perhaps none more so than McDonald's. In fact, if you were to hold a McDonald's organizational chart and a Black Disciples org chart side-by-side, you could hardly tell the difference. The gang that Venkatesh had fallen in with was one of about a hundred branches, franchises really, of a larger Black Disciples organization. J.T., the college-educated leader of his franchise, reported to a central leadership of about twenty men that was called, without irony, the Board of Directors. J.T. paid the Board of Directors nearly twenty percent of his revenues for the right to sell crack in a designated twelve-square block area. The rest of the money was his to distribute as he saw fit. Three officers reported directly to J.T.—an enforcer, who ensured the gang members' safety, a treasurer, who watched over the gang's liquid assets, and a runner, who transported large quantities of drugs and money to and from the supplier. Beneath the officers were the street-level salesmen known as foot soldiers. The goal of a foot soldier was to someday become an officer. J.T. might have had anywhere from twenty-five to seventy-five foot soldiers on his payroll at any given time, depending on the time of year. Autumn was the best crack-selling season, summer and Christmastime were slow, and, depending on the size of the gang's territory, which doubled at one point when the Black Disciples engineered a hostile takeover of a rival gang's turf. At the very bottom of J.T.'s organization were as many as two hundred members known as the rank-and-file. They were not employees at all. They did, however, pay dues to the gang, some for protection from rival gangs, others for the chance to eventually earn a job as a foot soldier. The four years recorded in the gang's notebooks coincided with the peak years of the crack boom, and business was excellent. J.T.'s franchise quadrupled its revenues during this period. In the first year, it took in an average of $18,500 each month. By the final year, it was collecting $68,400 a month. Here is a look at the monthly revenues in the third year. Drug sales, $24,800. Taxes, $5,100. Extortionary taxes, $2,100. So the average total monthly revenue in that third year was $32,000. The $24,800 in drug sales represents only the money from dealing crack cocaine. The gang did allow some rank-and-file members to sell heroin on its turf, but accepted a fixed licensing fee in lieu of a share of profits. This was off the book's money and went straight into J.T.'s pocket. He probably skimmed from other sources as well. The $5,100 in monthly dues came from rank-and-file members only, since full gang members didn't pay dues. The extortionary taxes were paid by other businesses that operated on the gang's turf, including grocery stores, gypsy cabs, pimps, and people selling stolen goods or repairing cars on the street. Now, here's what it cost J.T., excluding wages, to bring in that $32,000 per month. Wholesale cost of drugs, $5,000. Board of directors fee, $5,000. Mercenary fighters, $1,300. Weapons, $300. Miscellaneous, $2,400. So the total monthly non-wage costs, on average, were $14,000. Mercenary fighters were non-members hired on short-term contracts to help the gang fight turf wars. The cost of weapons, just $300, is small because the Black Disciples had a side deal with local gunrunners, helping them navigate the neighborhood in exchange for free or steeply discounted guns. The miscellaneous expenses here included legal fees, parties, bribes, and gang-sponsored community events. The Black Disciples worked hard to be seen as a pillar rather than a scourge of the Housing Project community. The miscellaneous expenses also include the costs associated with a gang member's murder. The gang not only paid for the funeral, but often gave a stipend of up to three years' wages to the victim's family. Venkatesh had once asked why the gang was so generous in this regard. That's a fucking stupid question, he was told, because as long as you've been with us you still don't understand that their families is our families. We can't just leave them out. We've been knowing these folks our whole lives, man, so we grieve when they grieve. You got to respect the family. There was another reason for the death benefits. The gang feared community backlash. Its enterprise was plainly a destructive one, and it figured it could buy some goodwill for a few hundred dollars here and there. The rest of the money the gang took in went to its members, starting with JT. Here is the single line item in the gang's budget that made JT the happiest. Net monthly profit accruing to leader, $8,500. At $8,500 per month, JT's annual salary was about $100,000, tax-free of course, and not including the various off-the-books money he pocketed. This was a lot more money than he earned at his short-lived office job in the loop. And JT was just one of roughly a hundred leaders at this level within the Black Disciples Network. So there were indeed some drug dealers who could afford to live large, or, in the case of the gang's board of directors, extremely large. Each of those top 20 bosses stood to earn about $500,000 a year. A third of them, however, were typically imprisoned at any time, a significant downside of an up position in an illicit industry. So the top 120 men on the Black Disciples pyramid were paid very well, but the pyramid they sat atop was gigantic. Including JT's franchise as a yardstick, three officers, and roughly 50 foot soldiers, there were some 5,300 other men working for those 120 bosses. Then there were another 20,000 unpaid rank-and-file members, many of whom wanted nothing more than an opportunity to become a foot soldier. They were even willing to pay gang dues to have their chance. And how well did that dream job pay? Here are the monthly totals for the wages that JT paid his gang members. Combined wages paid to all three officers, $2,100. Combined wages paid to all foot soldiers, $7,400. So JT paid all his employees $9,500, a combined monthly salary that was only $1,000 more than his own official salary. JT's hourly wage was $66. His three officers, meanwhile, each took home $700 a month, which works out to about $7 an hour. And the foot soldiers earned just $3.30 an hour, less than the minimum wage. So the answer to the original question, if drug dealers make so much money, why are they still living with their mothers, is that except for the top cats, they don't make much money. They had no choice but to live with their mothers. For every big earner, there were hundreds more just scraping along. The top 120 men in the Black Disciples gang represented just 2.2% of the full-fledged gang membership, but took home well more than half the money. In other words, a crack gang works pretty much like the standard capitalist enterprise. You have to be pretty near the top of the pyramid to make a big wage. Notwithstanding the leadership's rhetoric about the family nature of the business, the gang's wages are about as skewed as wages in corporate America. A foot soldier had plenty in common with a McDonald's burger flipper or a Walmart shelf stocker. In fact, most of JT's foot soldiers also held minimum wage jobs in the legitimate sector to supplement their skimpy, illicit earnings. The leader of another crack gang once told Venkatesh that he could easily afford to pay his foot soldiers more, but it wouldn't be prudent. "'You got all these niggers below you who want your job, you dig?' he said. "'So, you know, you try to take care of them, but you know, you also have to show them you're the boss. You always have to get yours first or you really ain't no leader. If you start taking losses, they see you as weak and shit.'" Along with the bad pay, the foot soldiers faced terrible job conditions. For starters, they had to stand on a street corner all day and do business with crackheads. The gang members were strongly advised against using the product themselves, advice that was enforced by beatings if necessary. Foot soldiers also risked arrest and, more worrisome, violence. Using the gang's financial documents and the rest of Venkatesh's research, it is possible to construct an adverse events index of JT's gang during the four years in question. The results are astonishingly bleak. If you were a member of JT's gang for all four years, here is the typical fate you would have faced during that period. Number of times arrested, 5.9. Number of non-fatal wounds or injuries, not including injuries meted out by the gang itself for rules violations, 2.4. Chance of being killed, 1 in 4. A 1 in 4 chance of being killed. Compare these odds to being a timber cutter, which the Bureau of Labor Statistics calls the most dangerous job in the United States. Over four years' time, a timber cutter would stand only a 1 in 200 chance of being killed. Or compare the crack dealer's odds to those of a death row inmate in Texas, which executes more prisoners than any other state. In 2003, Texas put to death 24 inmates, or just 5% of the nearly 500 inmates on its death row during that time. Which means that you stand a greater chance of dying while dealing crack in a Chicago housing project than you do while sitting on death row in Texas. So if crack dealing is the most dangerous job in America, and if the salary is only $3.30 an hour, why on earth would anyone take such a job? Well, for the same reason that a pretty Wisconsin farm girl moves to Hollywood, for the same reason that a high school quarterback wakes up at 5am to lift weights, they all want to succeed in an extremely competitive field in which, if you reach the top, you are paid a fortune, to say nothing of the attendant glory and power. To the kids growing up in a housing project on Chicago's South Side, crack dealing was a glamour profession. For many of them, the job of gang boss, highly visible and highly lucrative, was easily the best job they thought they had access to. Had they grown up under different circumstances, they might have thought about becoming economists or writers. But in the neighborhood where J.T.'s gang operated, the path to a decent, legitimate job was practically invisible. Fifty-six percent of the neighborhood's children lived below the poverty line, compared to a national average of 18 percent. Seventy-eight percent came from single-parent homes. Fewer than five percent of the neighborhood's adults had a college degree. Barely one in three adult men worked at all. The neighborhood's median income was about $15,000 a year, well less than half the U.S. average. During the years that Venkatesh lived with J.T.'s gang, foot soldiers often asked his help in landing what they called a good job, that is, working as a janitor at the University of Chicago. The problem with crack dealing is the same as in every other glamour profession. A lot of people are competing for very few prizes. Earning big money in the crack gang wasn't much more likely than the Wisconsin farm girls becoming a movie star or the high school quarterbacks playing in the NFL. But criminals, like everyone else, respond to incentives. So if the prize is big enough, they will form a line down the block just hoping for a chance. On the south side of Chicago, people wanting to sell crack vastly outnumbered the available street corners. These budding drug lords bumped up against an immutable law of labor. When there are a lot of people willing and able to do a job, that job generally doesn't pay well. This is one of four meaningful factors that determine a wage. The others are the specialized skills a job requires, the unpleasantness of a job, and the demand for services that the job fulfills. The delicate balance between these factors helps explain why, for instance, the typical prostitute earns more than the typical architect. It may not seem as though she should. The architect would appear to be more skilled, as the word is usually defined, and better educated, again, as usually defined. But little girls don't grow up dreaming of becoming prostitutes, so the supply of potential prostitutes is relatively small. Their skills, while not necessarily specialized, are practiced in a very specialized context. The job is unpleasant and forbidding in at least two significant ways, the likelihood of violence and the lost opportunity of having a stable family life. As for demand? Let's just say that an architect is more likely to hire a prostitute than vice versa. In the glamour professions—movies, sports, music, fashion—there's a different dynamic at play. Even in second-tier glamour industries like publishing, advertising, and media, swarms of bright young people throw themselves at grunt jobs that pay poorly and demand unstinting devotion. An editorial assistant earning $22,000 at a Manhattan publishing house, an unpaid high school quarterback, and a teenage crack dealer earning $3.30 an hour are all playing the same game—a game that is best viewed as a tournament. The rules of a tournament are straightforward. You must start at the bottom to have a shot at the top. Just as a major league shortstop probably played little league, and just as a grand dragon of the Ku Klux Klan probably started out as a lowly spear carrier, a drug lord typically began by selling drugs on a street corner. You must be willing to work long and hard at substandard wages. In order to advance in the tournament, you must prove yourself not merely above average, but spectacular. The way to distinguish yourself differs from profession to profession, of course. While JT certainly monitored his foot soldier's sales performance, it was their force of personality that really counted—more than it would for, say, a shortstop. And finally, once you come to the sad realization that you will never make it to the top, you will quit the tournament. Some people hang on longer than others—witness the graying actors who wait tables in New York—but generally, people get the message.