clansmen to be there, in their robes. He added that the Clavalier Club, the clan's whipping and flogging department, was now on the job and had plenty of friends on the Atlanta police force. As the Pearson and Superman radio shows played on and as Stetson Kennedy continued to relay the clan secrets obtained by John Brown to other broadcast and print outlets, a funny thing happened. Attendance at clan meetings began to fall, as did applications for new membership. Of all the ideas that Kennedy had thought up to fight bigotry, this campaign was easily the cleverest. He had turned the clan's secrecy against itself by making its private information public. He converted heretofore precious knowledge into ammunition for mockery. Americans who might have been philosophically inclined to oppose the clan had now been given enough specific information to oppose them more actively, and public sentiment began to shift. Americans who might have been philosophically inclined to embrace the clan had now been given all sorts of caution against doing so. Although the clan would never quite die, especially down south, David Duke, a smooth-talking clan leader from Louisiana, mounted substantive bids for the US Senate and other offices. It was certainly handicapped, at least in the short term, by Stetson Kennedy's brazen dissemination of inside information. While it is impossible to tease out the exact impact that his work had on the clan, many people have given Kennedy a great deal of credit for damaging an institution that was in grave need of being damaged. This did not come about because Stetson Kennedy was courageous or resolute or unflappable, even though he may have been all of these. It happened because he understood the raw power of information. The Ku Klux Klan, much like politicians or real estate agents or stockbrokers, was a group whose power was derived in large part from the fact that it hoarded information. But once that information falls into the wrong hands, or, depending on your point of view, the right hands, much of the group's advantage disappears. In the late 1990s, the price of term life insurance fell dramatically. This posed something of a mystery, for the decline had no obvious cause. Other types of insurance, including health and automobile and homeowner's coverage, were certainly not falling in price, nor had there been any radical change among insurance companies, insurance brokers, or the people who buy term life insurance. So what happened? The Internet happened. In the spring of 1996, Quotesmith.com became the first of several websites that enabled a customer to compare, within seconds, the price of term life insurance sold by dozens of different companies. For such websites, term life insurance was a perfect product. Unlike other forms of insurance, including whole life insurance, which is a far more complicated financial instrument, term life policies are fairly homogenous. One 30-year guaranteed policy for one million dollars is essentially identical to the next. So what really matters is the price. Shopping around for the cheapest policy, a process that had been convoluted and time-consuming, was suddenly made simple. With customers able to instantaneously find the cheapest policy, the more expensive companies had no choice but to lower their prices. Suddenly, customers were paying one billion dollars less a year for term life insurance. It is worth noting that these websites only listed prices. They didn't even sell the policies. So it wasn't really insurance they were peddling. Like Stetson Kennedy, they were dealing in information. Had the Internet been around when Kennedy infiltrated the Klan, he probably would have rushed home after each meeting and blogged his brains out. To be sure, there are differences between exposing the Ku Klux Klan and exposing insurance companies' high premiums. The Klan trafficked in secret information whose secrecy engendered fear, while insurance prices were less a secret than a set of facts dispensed in a way that made comparisons difficult. But in both instances, the dissemination of the information diluted its power. As Supreme Court Justice Louis D. Brandeis once wrote, sunlight is said to be the best of disinfectants. Information is a beacon, a cudgel, an olive branch, a deterrent, depending on who wields it and how. Information is so powerful that the assumption of information, even if the information does not actually exist, can have a sobering effect. Consider the case of a one-day-old car. The day that a car is driven off the lot is the worst day in its life, for it instantly loses as much as a quarter of its value. This might seem absurd, but we know it to be true. A new car that was bought for $20,000 cannot be resold for more than perhaps $15,000. Why? Because the only person who might logically want to resell a brand-new car is someone who found the car to be a lemon. So even if the car isn't a lemon, a potential buyer assumes that it is. He assumes that the seller has some information about the car that he, the buyer, does not have, and the seller is punished for this assumed information. And if the car is a lemon, the seller would do well to wait a year to sell it. By then, the suspicion of lemonness will have faded. By then, some people will be selling their perfectly good year-old cars, and the lemon can blend in with them, likely selling for more than it is truly worth. It is common that one party to a transaction has better information than another party. In the parlance of economists, such a case is known as an information asymmetry. We accept as a verity of capitalism that someone, usually an expert, knows more than someone else, usually a consumer. But information asymmetries everywhere have in fact been mortally wounded by the Internet. Information is the currency of the Internet. As a medium, the Internet is brilliantly efficient at shifting information from the hands of those who have it into the hands of those who do not. Often, as in the case of term life insurance policies, the information existed, but in a woefully scattered way. In such instances, the Internet acts like a giant horseshoe magnet waved over an endless sea of haystacks, plucking the needle out of each one. Just as Stetson Kennedy accomplished what no journalist, do-gooder, or prosecutor could, the Internet has accomplished what no consumer advocate could. It has vastly shrunk the gap between the experts and the public. The Internet has proven particularly fruitful for situations in which a face-to-face encounter with an expert might actually exacerbate the problem of asymmetrical information. Situations in which an expert uses his informational advantage to make us feel stupid, or rushed, or cheap, or ignoble. Consider a scenario in which your loved one has just died, and now the funeral director, who knows that you know next to nothing about his business, and are under emotional duress to boot, steers you to the $7,000 mahogany casket. Or consider the automobile dealership. The salesman does his best to obscure the car's base price under a mountain of add-ons and incentives. Later, however, in the cool-headed calm of your home, you can use the Internet to find out exactly how much the dealer paid the manufacturer for that car. Or you might just log on to www.tributedirect.com and buy that mahogany casket yourself for just $3,200 delivered overnight. Unless you decide to spend $2,995 for The Last Hole, a casket with golf scenes, or Memories of the Hunt, featuring big racked bucks and other prey, or one of the much cheaper models that the funeral director somehow failed to even mention. The Internet, powerful as it is, has hardly slain the beast that is information asymmetry. Consider the so-called corporate scandals of the early 2000s. The crimes committed by Enron included hidden partnerships, disguised debt, and the manipulation of energy markets. Henry Blodgett of Merrill Lynch and Jack Grubman of Salomon Smith Barney wrote glowing research reports of companies they knew to be junk. Sam Waxall dumped his Imclone shares when he got early word of a damaging report from the Food and Drug Administration. His friend Martha Stewart also dumped her shares, then lied about the reason. WorldCom and Global Crossing fabricated billions of dollars in revenues to pump up their stock prices. One group of mutual fund companies let preferred customers trade at preferred prices, and another group was charged with hiding management fees. Though extraordinarily diverse, these crimes all have a common trait. They were sins of information. Most of them involved an expert, or a gang of experts, promoting false information or hiding true information. In each case, the experts were trying to keep the information asymmetry as asymmetrical as possible. The practitioners of such acts, especially in the realm of high finance, inevitably offer this defense. Everybody else was doing it. Which may be largely true. One characteristic of information crimes is that very few of them are detected. Unlike street crimes, they do not leave behind a corpse or a broken window. Unlike a bagel criminal, that is, someone who eats one of Paul Feldman's bagels but doesn't pay, an information criminal typically doesn't have someone like Feldman tallying every nickel. For an information crime to reach the surface, something drastic must happen. When it does, the results tend to be pretty revealing. The perpetrators, after all, weren't thinking about their private actions being made public. Consider the Enron tapes, the secretly recorded conversations of Enron employees that surfaced after the company imploded. During a phone conversation on August 5, 2000, two traders chatted about how a wildfire in California would allow Enron to jack up its electricity prices. The magical word of the day, said one trader, is burn, baby, burn. A few months later, a pair of Enron traders named Kevin and Tom talked about how California officials wanted to make Enron refund the profits of its price gouging. Kevin, they're fucking taking all the money back from you guys? All the money you stole from those poor grandmas in California? Bob, yeah, Grandma Millie, man. Kevin, yeah, now she wants her fucking money back for all the power you jammed right up her ass for fucking $250 a megawatt hour. If you were to assume that many experts use their information to your detriment, you'd be right. Experts depend on the fact that you don't have the information they do, or that you were so befuddled by the complexity of their operation that you wouldn't know what to do with the information if you had it, or that you were so in awe of their expertise that you wouldn't dare challenge them. If your doctor suggests that you have angioplasty, even though some current research suggests that angioplasty does little to prevent heart attacks, you aren't likely to think that the doctor is using his informational advantage to make a few thousand dollars for himself or his buddy. But as David Hillis, an interventional cardiologist at the University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center in Dallas explained to the New York Times, a doctor may have the same economic incentives as a car salesman, or a funeral director, or a mutual fund manager. If you're an invasive cardiologist, said David Hillis, and Joe Smith, the local internist, is sending you patients, and if you tell them they don't need the procedure, pretty soon Joe Smith doesn't send patients anymore. Armed with information, experts can exert a gigantic, if unspoken, leverage. Fear. Fear that your children will find you dead on the bathroom floor of a heart attack if you do not have angioplasty surgery. Fear that a cheap casket will expose your grandmother to a terrible underground fate. Fear that a $25,000 car will crumple like a toy in an accident, whereas a $50,000 car will wrap your loved ones in a cocoon of impregnable steel. The fear created by commercial experts may not quite rival the fear created by terrorists, like the Ku Klux Klan, but the principle is the same. Consider a transaction that wouldn't seem, on the surface, to create much fear. Selling your house. What's so scary about that? Aside from the fact that selling your house is typically the largest financial transaction in your life, and that you probably have scant experience in real estate, and that you may have an enormous emotional attachment to your house, there are at least two pressing fears. That you will sell the house for far less than it is worth, and that you will not be able to sell it at all. In the first case, you fear setting the price too low. In the second, you fear setting it too high. It is the job of your real estate agent, of course, to find the golden mean. She is the one with all the information, the inventory of similar houses, the recent sales trends, the tremors of the mortgage market, perhaps even a lead on an interested buyer. You feel fortunate to have such a knowledgeable expert as an ally in this most confounding enterprise. Too bad she sees things differently. A real estate agent may see you not so much as an ally, but as a mark. Think back to the study cited at the beginning of this recording, which measured the difference between the sales price of homes that belong to real estate agents themselves, and the houses they sold for their clients. The study found that an agent keeps her own house on the market an average 10 extra days, waiting for a better offer, and sells it for over 3% more than your house, or $10,000 on the sale of a $300,000 house. That's $10,000 going into her pocket that does not go into yours, a nifty profit produced by the abuse of information and a keen understanding of incentives. The problem is that the agent only stands to personally gain an additional $150 by selling your house for $10,000 more, which isn't much reward for a lot of extra work. So her job is to convince you that a $300,000 offer is in fact a very good offer, even a generous one, and that only a fool would refuse it. This can be tricky. The agent does not want to come right out and call you a fool, so she merely implies it, perhaps by telling you about the much bigger, nicer, newer house down the block that has sat unsold for six months. Here is the agent's main weapon, the conversion of information into fear. Consider this true story, related by John Donahue, a law professor who in 2001 was teaching at Stanford University. I was just about to buy a house on the Stanford campus, he recalls, and the seller's agent kept telling me what a good deal I was getting because the market was about to zoom. As soon as I signed the purchase contract, he asked me if I would need an agent to sell my previous Stanford house. I told him that I would probably try to sell without an agent, and he replied, John, that might work under normal conditions, but with the market tanking now, you really need the help of a broker. Within five minutes, a zooming market had tanked. Such are the marvels that can be conjured by an agent in search of the next deal. Consider now another true story of a real estate agent's information abuse. This tale involves someone we'll call T, a close friend of one of this book's authors. T wanted to buy a house that was listed at $469,000. He was prepared to offer $450,000, but he first called the seller's agent and asked her to name the lowest price that she thought the homeowner might accept. The agent promptly scolded T. You ought to be ashamed of yourself, she said. That is clearly a violation of real estate ethics. T apologized. The conversation turned to other more mundane issues. After 10 minutes, as the conversation was ending, the agent told T, let me say one last thing. My client is willing to sell this house for a lot less than you might think. Based on this conversation, T then offered $425,000 for the house instead of the $450,000 he had planned to offer. In the end, the seller accepted $430,000. Thanks to his own agent's intervention, the seller lost at least $20,000. The agent, meanwhile, only lost $300, a small price to pay to ensure that she would quickly and easily lock up the sale, which netted her a commission of $6,450. So a big part of a real estate agent's job, it would seem, is to persuade the homeowner to sell for less than he would like, while at the same time letting potential buyers know that a house can be bought for less than its listing price. To be sure, there are more subtle means of doing so than coming right out and telling the buyer to bid low. The study of real estate agents cited earlier also reveals how agents convey information through the for-sale ads they write. A phrase like well-maintained, for instance, is as full of meaning to an agent as Mr. Ayak was to a Klansman. What well-maintained means is that a house is old but not quite falling down. A savvy buyer will know this or find out for himself once he sees the house, but to the 65-year-old retiree who is selling his house, well-maintained might sound like a compliment, which is just what the agent intends. An analysis of the language used in real estate ads shows that certain words are powerfully correlated with the final sale price of a house. This doesn't necessarily mean that labeling a house well-maintained causes it to sell for less than an equivalent house. It does, however, indicate that when a real estate agent labels a house well-maintained, she is subtly encouraging a buyer to bid low. Here now are ten terms commonly used in real estate ads. Five of them have a strong positive correlation to the ultimate sales price and five have a strong negative correlation. Feel free to guess which are which. Fantastic, granite, spacious, state-of-the-art, an exclamation point, corian, charming, maple, great neighborhood, gourmet. A fantastic house is surely fantastic enough to warrant a high price, isn't it? What about a, quote, charming and, quote, spacious house in a, quote, great neighborhood? No, no.