Perceptual illusions, like those experienced by pilots, faulty narrative, distortions of memory, failure to recognize when a new kind of problem requires a new kind of solution, and a variety of cognitive biases to which we're prone. We describe a number of these hazards here, and then we offer measures you can take, akin to scanning the cockpit instruments, to help keep your thinking aligned with reality. Our understanding of the world is shaped by a hunger for narrative that rises out of our discomfort with ambiguity and arbitrary events. When surprising things happen, we search for an explanation. The urge to resolve ambiguity can be surprisingly potent, even when the subject is inconsequential. In a study where participants thought they were being measured for reading comprehension and their ability to solve anagrams, they were exposed to the distraction of a background phone conversation. Some heard only one side of a conversation, and others heard both sides. The participants, not knowing that the distraction itself was the subject of the study, tried to ignore what they were hearing, so as to stay focused on the reading and anagram solutions. The results showed that overhearing one side of a conversation proved more distracting than overhearing both sides, and the content of those partial conversations was better recalled later by the unintentional eavesdroppers. Why was this? Presumably, those overhearing half a conversation were strongly compelled to try to infer the missing half in a way that made for a complete narrative. As the authors point out, the study may help explain why we find one-sided cell phone conversations in public spaces so intrusive, but it also reveals the ineluctable way we are drawn to imbue the events around us with rational explanations. The discomfort with ambiguity and arbitrariness is equally powerful, or more so, in our need for a rational understanding of our own lives. We strive to fit the events of our lives into a cohesive story that accounts for our circumstances, the things that befall us, and the choices we make. Each of us has a different narrative that has many threads woven into it, from our shared culture and experience of being human, as well as many distinct threads that explain the singular events of one's personal past. All these experiences influence what comes to mind in a current situation and the narrative through which you make sense of it. Why nobody in my family attended college until me? Why my father never made a fortune in business? Why I'd never want to work in a corporation, or maybe why I would never want to work for myself? We gravitate to the narratives that best explain our emotions. In this way, narrative and memory become one. The memories we organize meaningfully become those that are better remembered. Narrative provides not only meaning but also a mental framework for imbuing future experiences and information with meaning, in effect, shaping new memories to fit our established constructs of the world and ourselves. No reader, when asked to account for the choices made under pressure by a novel's protagonist, can keep her own life experience from shading her explanation of what must have been going on in the character's interior world. The success of a magician or politician, like that of a novelist, relies on the seductive powers of narrative and on the audience's willing suspension of disbelief. Nowhere is this more evident than in the national political debate, where like-minded people gather online at community meetings and in the media to find common purpose and expand the story they feel best explains their sense of how the world works and how humans and politicians should behave. You can see how quickly personal narrative is invoked to explain emotions when you read an article online whose author has argued a position on almost any subject, for example, an op-ed piece supporting the use of testing as a powerful tool for learning. Scan the comments posted by readers. Some sing hallelujah, while others can scarcely contain their umbrage, each invoking a personal story that supports or refutes the column's main argument. The psychologists Larry Jacoby, Bob Bjork, and Colleen Kelly, summing up studies on illusions of comprehension, competence, and remembering, write that it is nearly impossible to avoid basing one's judgments on subjective experience. Humans do not give greater credence to an objective record of a past event than to their subjective remembering of it, and we are surprisingly insensitive to the ways our particular construals of a situation are unique to ourselves. Thus, the narrative of memory becomes central to our intuitions regarding the judgments we make and the actions we take. It is a confounding paradox, then, that the changeable nature of our memory not only can skew our perceptions but also is essential to our ability to learn. As will be familiar to you by now, every time we call up a memory, we make the mind's roots to that memory stronger, and this capacity to strengthen, expand, and modify memory is central to how we deepen our learning and broaden the connections to what we know and what we can do. Memory has some similarities to a Google search algorithm, in the sense that the more you connect what you learn to what you already know and the more associations you make to a memory—for example, linking it with a visual image, a place, or a larger story—then the more mental cues you have through which to find and retrieve the memory again later. This capacity expands our agency, our ability to take action and be effective in the world. At the same time, because memory is a shapeshifter reconciling the competing demands of emotion, suggestions, and narrative, it serves you well to stay open to the fallibility of your certainties. Even your most cherished memories may not represent events in the exact way they occurred. Memory can be distorted in many ways. People interpret a story in light of their world knowledge, imposing order where none had been present so as to make a more logical story. Memory is a reconstruction. We cannot remember every aspect of an event, so we remember those elements that have greatest emotional significance for us, and we fill in the gaps with details of our own that are consistent with our narrative but may be wrong. People remember things that were implied but not specifically stated. The literature is full of examples. In one, many people who read a paragraph about a troubled girl named Helen Keller later mistake mistakenly recalled the phrase deaf, dumb, and blind as being in the text. This mistake was rarely made by another group who read the same paragraph about a girl named Carol Harris. Imagination inflation refers to the tendency of people who, when asked to imagine an event vividly, will sometimes begin to believe, when asked about it later, that the event actually occurred. Adults who were asked, quote, did you ever break a window with your hand, were more likely on a later life inventory to report that they believed this event occurred during their lifetimes. It seems that asking the question led them to imagine the event, and the act of having imagined it had the effect later of making them more likely to think it had occurred, relative to another group who answered the question without having previously imagined it occurring. Hypothetical events that are imagined vividly can seat themselves in the mind as firmly as memories of actual events. For instance, when it is suspected that a child is being sexually abused and he is interviewed and questioned about it, he may imagine experiences that the interviewer describes and then later come to, quote, remember them as having occurred. Sadly, of course, many memories of childhood sexual abuse are absolutely true, usually ones reported soon after the occurrence. Another type of memory illusion is one caused by suggestion, which may arise simply in the way a question is asked. In one example, people watched a video of a car running a stop sign at an intersection and colliding with another car passing through. Those who were later asked to judge the speed of the vehicles when they, quote, contacted each other gave an average estimate of 32 miles per hour. Those who were asked to judge the speed when the two vehicles, quote, smashed into each other estimated, on average, 41 miles per hour. If the speed limit was 30 miles per hour, asking the question the second way rather than the first could lead to the drivers being charged with speeding. Of course, the legal system knows the danger of witnesses being asked leading questions, ones that encourage a particular answer, but such questions are difficult to avoid completely because suggestibility can be very subtle. After all, in the case just discussed, the two cars did, quote, smash together. Some witnesses to crimes who are struggling to recall them are instructed to let their minds roam freely, to generate whatever comes to mind, even if it's a guess. However, the act of guessing about possible events causes people to provide their own misinformation which, if left uncorrected, they may later come to retrieve as memories. That is one reason why people who have been interviewed after being hypnotized are barred from testifying in court in almost all states and Canadian provinces. The hypnotic interview typically encourages people to let their thoughts roam freely and produce everything that comes to mind in hopes that they will retrieve information that would not otherwise be produced. However, this process causes them to produce much erroneous information, and studies have shown that when they are tested later, under instructions only to tell exactly what they remember of the actual events, their guesses, made while under hypnosis, cloud their memories about what truly happened. In particular, they remember events they produced under hypnosis as actual experiences, even under conditions in the laboratory when it is known that the events in question did not occur. Interference from other events can distort memory. Suppose the police interview a witness shortly after a crime, showing pictures of possible suspects. Time passes, but eventually the police nab a suspect, one whose picture had been viewed by the witness. If the witness is now asked to view a lineup, he may mistakenly remember one of the suspects whose photo he saw as having been present at the crime. A particularly vivid example of a related process happened to the Australian psychologist Donald M. Thompson. A woman in Sydney was watching television in midday when she heard a knock at the door. When she answered it, she was attacked, raped, and left unconscious. When she awoke and dialed the police, they came to her aid, got a description of her assailant, and launched a search. They spotted Donald Thompson walking down a Sydney street, and he matched the description. They arrested him on the spot. It turns out that Thompson had an airtight alibi. At the exact time of the rape, he was being interviewed on a live television show. The police did not believe him and sneered when he was being interrogated. However, the story was true. The woman had been watching the show when she heard the knock on the door. The description she gave the police was apparently of the man she saw on television, Donald Thompson, rather than the rapist. Her System 1 reaction, quick but sometimes mistaken, provided the wrong description, probably due to her extreme emotional state. What psychologists call the curse of knowledge is our tendency to underestimate how long it will take another person to learn something new or perform a task that we have already mastered. Teachers often suffer this illusion. The calculus instructor, who finds calculus so easy that she can no longer place herself in the shoes of the student who is just starting out and struggling with the subject. The curse of knowledge effect is close kin to hindsight bias, or what is often called the knew-it-all-along effect, in which we view events after the fact as having been more predictable than they were before they occurred. Stock market pundits will confidently announce on the evening news why the stock market behaved as it did that day, even though they could not have predicted the movements that morning. Accounts that sound familiar can create the feeling of knowing and be mistaken for true. This is one reason that political or advertising claims that are not factual but are repeated can gain traction with the public, particularly if they have emotional resonance. Something you once heard that you hear again later carries a warmth of familiarity that can be mistaken for memory, a shred of something you once knew and cannot quite place but are inclined to believe. In the world of propaganda, this is called the big lie technique. Even a big lie told repeatedly can come to be accepted as truth. Fluency illusions result from our tendency to mistake fluency with a text for mastery of its content. For example, if you read a particularly lucid presentation of a difficult concept, you can get the idea that it is actually pretty simple, and perhaps even that you knew it all along. As discussed earlier, students who study by re-reading their texts can mistake their fluency with a text gained from re-reading for possession of accessible knowledge of the subject and consequently overestimate how well they will do on a test. Our memories are also subject to social influence and tend to align with the memories of the people around us. If you are in a group reminiscing about past experiences and someone adds a wrong detail about the story, you will tend to incorporate this detail into your own memory and later remember the experience with the erroneous detail. This process is called memory conformity or the social contagion of memory. One person's error can infect another person's memory. Of course, social influences are not always bad. If someone recalls details of joint memory on which you are somewhat hazy, your subsequent memory will be updated and will hold a more accurate record of the past event. In the averse of the social influence effect, humans are predisposed to assume that others shared their beliefs, a process called the false consensus effect. We generally fail to recognize the idiosyncratic nature of our personal understanding of the world and interpretation of events, and that ours differ from others. Recall how surprised you were, recently, on commiserating with a friend about the general state of affairs, to discover that she sees in an entirely different light matters on which you thought the correct view was fundamental and obvious—climate change, gun control, fracking of gas wells, or perhaps something very local, such as whether to pass a bond issue for a school building or to oppose construction of a big-box store in the neighborhood. Confidence in a memory is not a reliable indication of its accuracy. We can have utmost faith in a vivid, nearly literal memory of an event, and yet find that we actually have it all wrong. Traditional tragedies, like the assassination of President John Kennedy or the events surrounding 9-11, create what psychologists call flashbulb memories, named for the vivid images that we retain, where we were when we got the news, how we learned it, how we felt, what we did. These memories are thought to be indelible, burned into our minds, and it is true that the broad outlines of such catastrophes thoroughly reported in the media are well-remembered, but your memory of your personal circumstances surrounding the events may not necessarily be accurate. There have been numerous studies of this phenomenon, including surveys of 1,500 Americans' memories of the September 11 attacks. In this study, the respondents' memories were surveyed a week after the attacks, again a year later, and then again three years and ten years later. Respondents' most emotional memories of their personal details at the time they learned of the attacks are also those of which they are most confident and, paradoxically, the ones that have most changed over the years relative to other memories about 9-11. Mental Models As we develop mastery in the various areas of our lives, we tend to bundle together the incremental steps that are required to solve different kinds of problems. To use an analogy from a previous chapter, you could think of them as something like smartphone apps in the brain. We call them mental models. Two examples in police work are the choreography of the routine traffic stop and the moves to take a weapon from an assailant at close quarters. Each of these maneuvers involves a set of perceptions and actions that cops can adapt with little conscious thought in response to context and situation. For a barista, a mental model would be the steps and ingredients to produce a perfect 16-ounce decaf frappuccino. For the receptionist at urgent care, it's triage and registration. The better you know something, the more difficult it becomes to teach it.