social, or economic breakthroughs come from. Besides which, accumulating knowledge can feel like a grind, while creativity sounds like a lot more fun. But of course, the dichotomy is false. You wouldn't want to see that T-shirt on your neurosurgeon or on the captain who's flying your plane across the Pacific. But the sentiment has gained some currency as a reaction to standardized testing. Fearing this kind of testing leads to an emphasis on memorization at the expense of high-level skills. Notwithstanding the pitfalls of standardized testing, what we really ought to ask is how to do better at building knowledge and creativity. For without knowledge, you don't have the foundation for the higher-level skills of analysis, synthesis, and creative problem-solving. As the psychologist Robert Sternberg and two colleagues put it, quote, one cannot apply what one knows in a practical manner if one does not know anything to apply, end quote. Mastery in any field, from cooking to chess to brain surgery, is a gradual accretion of knowledge, conceptual understanding, judgment, and skill. These are the fruits of variety in the practice of new skills and of striving, reflection, and mental rehearsal. Memorizing facts is like stocking a construction site with the supplies to put up a house. Building the house requires not only knowledge of countless different fittings and materials, but conceptual understanding, too, of aspects like the load-bearing properties of a header or roof truss system, or the principles of energy transfer and conservation that will keep the house warm but the roof deck cold so the owner doesn't call six months later with ice dam problems. Mastery requires both the possession of ready knowledge and the conceptual understanding of how to use it. When Matt Brown had to decide whether or not to kill his right engine, he was problem-solving, and he needed to know from memory the procedures for flying with a dead engine and the tolerances of his plane in order to predict whether he would fall out of the air or be unable to straighten up for landing. The would-be neurosurgeon in her first year of med school has to memorize the whole nervous system, the whole skeletal system, the whole muscular system, the humeral system. If she can't, she's not going to be a neurosurgeon. Her success will depend on diligence, of course, but also on finding study strategies that will enable her to learn the sheer volume of material required in the limited hours available. Testing, dipstick versus learning tool. There are few surer ways to raise the hackles of many students and educators than talking about testing. The growing focus over recent years on standardized assessment, in particular, has turned testing into a lightning rod for frustration over how to achieve the country's education goals. Online forums and news articles are besieged by readers who charge that emphasis on testing favors memorization at the expense of a larger grasp of context or creative ability, that testing creates extra stress for students and gives a false measure of ability, and so on. But if we stop thinking of testing as a dipstick to measure learning, if we think of it as practicing retrieval of learning from memory rather than testing, we open ourselves to another possibility, the use of testing as a tool for learning. One of the most striking research findings is the power of active retrieval, testing, to strengthen memory, and that the more effortful the retrieval, the stronger the benefit. Think flight simulator versus PowerPoint lecture. Think quiz versus rereading. The act of retrieving learning from memory has two profound benefits. One, it tells you what you know and don't know, and therefore, where to focus further study to improve the areas where you're weak. Two, recalling what you have learned causes your brain to reconsolidate the memory, which strengthens its connections to what you already know and makes it easier for you to recall in the future. In effect, retrieval, testing, interrupts forgetting. Consider an 8th grade science class. For the class in question, at a middle school in Columbia, Illinois, researchers arranged for part of the material covered during the course to be the subject of low-stakes quizzing with feedback at three points in the semester. Another part of the material was never quizzed but was studied three times in review. In a test a month later, which material was better recalled? The students averaged A- on the material that was quizzed and C-plus on the material that was not quizzed but reviewed. In Matt Brown's case, even after ten years piloting the same business jet, his employer reinforces his mastery every six months in a battery of tests and flight simulations that require him to retrieve the information and maneuvers that are essential to stay in control of his plane. As Matt points out, you hardly ever have an emergency, so if you don't practice what to do, there's no way to keep it fresh. Both of these cases, the research in the classroom and the experience of Matt Brown in updating his knowledge, point to the critical role of retrieval practice in keeping our knowledge accessible to us when we need it. The power of active retrieval is the topic of Chapter 2. The Takeaway For the most part, we are going about learning in the wrong ways, and we are giving poor advice to those who are coming up behind us. A great deal of what we think we know about how to learn is taken on faith and based on intuition but does not hold up under empirical research. Persistent illusions of knowing lead us to labor at unproductive strategies, as recounted in Chapter 3. This is true even of people who have participated in empirical studies and seen the evidence for themselves firsthand. Illusions are potent persuaders. One of the best habits a learner can instill in herself is regular self-quizzing to recalibrate her understanding of what she does and does not know. Second Lieutenant Kylie Hunkler, a 2013 graduate of West Point and winner of a Rhodes Scholarship whom we write about in Chapter 8, uses the phrase, quote, to describe how she takes practice tests to help refocus her studying. In overland navigation, shooting an azimuth means climbing to a height, sighting an object on the horizon in the direction you're traveling, and adjusting your compass heading to make sure you're still gaining on your objective as you beat through the forest below. The good news is that we now know of simple and practical strategies that anybody can use at any point in life to learn better and remember longer. Various forms of retrieval practice, such as low-stakes quizzing and self-testing, spacing out practice, interleaving the practice of different but related topics or skills, trying to solve a problem before being taught the solution, distilling the underlying principles or rules that differentiate types of problems, and so on. In the chapters that follow, we describe these in depth. And because learning is an iterative process that requires that you revisit what you have learned earlier and continually update it and connect it with new knowledge, we circle through these topics several times along the way. At the end, in Chapter 8, we put it all together with specific tips and examples for putting these tools to work. Chapter 2 To Learn, Retrieve Mike Ebersold got called into a hospital emergency room one afternoon late in 2011 to examine a Wisconsin deer hunter who had been found lying unconscious in a cornfield. The man had blood at the back of his head, and the men who had found him brought him in supposed he'd maybe stumbled and cracked his skull on something. Ebersold is a neurosurgeon. The injury had brain protruding, and he recognized it as a gunshot wound. The hunter regained consciousness in the ER, but when asked how he'd hurt himself, he had no idea. Recounting the incident later, Ebersold said, quote, Somebody from some distance away must have fired what appeared to be a 12-gauge shotgun, which arced over God-only-knows-what distance, hit this guy in the back of his head, fractured his skull, and lodged into the brain about an inch. It must have been pretty much spent, or it would have gone deeper. End quote. Ebersold is tall, slender, and counts among his forebears the Dakota chiefs named Wapasha and the French fur traders named Roque, who populated this part of the Mississippi River Valley where the Mayo brothers would later found their famous clinic. Ebersold's formal training included four years of college, four years of medical school, and seven years of neurosurgery training, building a foundation of knowledge and skills that has been broadened and deepened through continuing medical education classes, consultations with his colleagues, and his practice at the Mayo Clinic and elsewhere. He carries himself with a Midwestern modesty that belies a career that counts a long list of high-profile patients who have sought out his services. When President Ronald Reagan needed treatment for injuries after a fall from his horse, Ebersold participated in the surgery and post-surgical care. When Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan al-Nayan, President of the United Arab Emirates, needed delicate spinal repair, he and what seemed like half the nation's ministry and security forces settled in Rochester while Mike Ebersold made the repair and oversaw Zayed's recovery. Following a long career at Mayo, Mike had returned to help out at the clinic in Wisconsin, feeling indebted to it for his early medical training. The hunter whose bad luck put him in the way of an errant 12-gauge slug was luckier than he likely knows that Mike was on the job that day. The bullet had entered an area of the skull beneath which there is a large venous sinus, a soft tissue channel that drains the brain cavity. As he examined the hunter, Ebersold knew from experience that when he opened up the wound, there was a high probability he would find this vein was torn. As he described it, quote, You say to yourself, this patient is going to need surgery. There's brain coming out of the wound. We have to clean this up and repair this as best we can. But in doing so, we may get into this big vein and that could be very, very serious. So you go through the checklist. You say, I might need a blood transfusion for this patient. So you set up some blood. You review the steps A, B, C, and D. You set up the operating room, telling them ahead of time what you might be encountering. All of this is sort of protocol, pretty much like a cop getting ready to pull over a car. You know what the book says? You've gone through all these steps. Then you get to the operating room and now you're still in this mode where you have time to think through it. You say, Gee, I don't want to just go and pull that bullet out if there might be major bleeding. What I'll try to do is I'll work around the edges and get things freed up so I'm ready for what could go wrong and then I'll pull it out. End quote. It turned out that the bullet and bone were lodged in the vein, serving as plugs, another lucky turn for the hunter. If the wound hadn't corked itself in the field, he would not have lived for more than two or three minutes. When Ebersold removed the bullet, the fractured bone chips fell away and the vein let loose in a torrent. Quote, Within five minutes, you've lost two or so units of blood and now you sort of transfer out of the mode where you're thinking through this, going through the options. Now it becomes reflex, mechanical. You know it's going to bleed very, very much so you have a very short time. You're just thinking, I have to get a suture around this structure and I know from previous experience I have to do it in this particular way. End quote. The vein in question, which is about the size of an adult's small finger, was torn in several places over a distance of about an inch and a half. It needed to be tied off above and below the rupture. But it's a flat structure that he knows well. You can't just put a stitch around it because when you tighten it, the tissue tears and the ligature leaks. Working urgently and mechanically, he fell back on a technique he developed out of necessity in past surgeries involving this vein. He cut two little pieces of muscle from where the patient's skin had been opened up in surgery and imported them to the site and stitched the ends of the torn vein to them. These plugs of muscle serve to close the vein without deflecting its natural shape or tearing its tissue. It's a solution Mike has taught himself, one he says you won't find written anywhere but handy in the moment, to say the least. In the 60 or so seconds it took to do, the patient lost another 200 cubic centimeters of blood. But once the plugs were in place, the bleeding stopped. Quote, Some people can't tolerate this sinus vein being closed off. They get increased brain pressure because the blood doesn't drain properly. But this patient was one of the fortunate who can. End quote. The hunter left the hospital a week later. He was minus some peripheral vision but otherwise remarkably unscathed from a very close brush with mortality. Reflection is a form of practice. What inferences can we draw from this story about how we learn and remember? In neurosurgery, and arguably in all aspects of life from the moment you leave the womb, there's an essential kind of learning that comes from reflection on personal experience. Ebersold described it this way. Quote, A lot of times something would come up in surgery And then I'd go home that night thinking about what happened and what could I do, for example, to improve the way a suturing went. How can I take a bigger bite with my needle or a smaller bite? Or should the stitches be closer together? What if I modified it this way or that way? Then the next day back, I'd try that and see if it worked better. Or even if it wasn't the next day, at least I've thought through this and in so doing, I've not only revisited things that I learned from lectures or from watching others performing surgery, but also I've complemented that by adding something of my own to it that I missed during the teaching process. End quote. Reflection can involve several cognitive activities that lead to stronger learning, retrieving knowledge and earlier training from memory, connecting these to new experiences, and visualizing and mentally rehearsing what you might do differently next time. It was this kind of reflection that originally had led Ebersold to try a new technique for repairing the sinus vein at the back of the head, a technique he practiced in his mind and in the operating room until it became the kind of reflexive maneuver you can depend on when your patient is spouting blood at 200 cubic centimeters a minute. To make sure the new learning is available when it's needed, Ebersold points out, quote, you memorize the list of things that you need to worry about in a given situation, steps A, B, C, and D. End quote. And you drill on them. Then there comes a time when you get into a tight situation and it's no longer a matter of thinking through the steps, it's a matter of reflexively taking the correct action. Quote, unless you keep recalling this maneuver, it will not become a reflex. Whether you're a police car driver in a tight situation or a quarterback dodging a tackle, you got to act out of reflex before you even had time to think, recalling it over and over, practicing it over and over. That's just so important. End quote. The testing effect. A child stringing cranberries on a thread goes to hang them on the tree, only to find they've slipped off the other end. Without the knot, there's no making a string. Without the knot, there's no necklace, there's no beaded purse, no magnificent tapestry. Retrieval ties the knot for memory. Repeated retrieval snugs it up and adds a loop to make it fast. Since as far back as 1885, psychologists have been plotting forgetting curves that illustrate just how fast children slip off the string. In very short order, we lose something like 70% of what we've just heard or read. After that, forgetting begins to slow, and the last 30% or so falls away more slowly. But the lesson is clear. A central challenge to improving the way we learn is finding a way to interrupt the process of forgetting. The power of retrieval as a learning tool is known among psychologists as the testing effect. In its most common form, testing is used to measure learning and assign grades in school. But we've long known that the act of retrieving knowledge from memory has the effect of making that knowledge easier to call up again in the future. In his essay on memory, Aristotle wrote, quote, exercise in repeatedly recalling a thing strengthens the memory, end quote. As Bacon wrote about this phenomenon, as did the psychologist William James, today we know from empirical research that practicing retrieval makes learning stick far better than re-exposure to the original material does. This is the testing effect, also known as the retrieval practice effect. To be most effective, retrieval must be repeated again and again in spaced-out sessions so that the recall, rather than becoming a mindless recitation, requires some cognitive effort. Repeated recall appears to help memory consolidate into a cohesive representation in the brain and to strengthen and multiply the neural roots by which the knowledge can later be retrieved. In recent decades, studies have confirmed what Mike Ebersold and every seasoned quarterback, jet pilot, and teenage texter knows from experience, that repeated retrieval can so embed knowledge and skills that they become reflexive. The brain acts before the mind has time to think. Yet despite what research and personal experience tell us about the power of testing as a learning tool, teachers and students in traditional educational settings rarely use it as such, and the technique remains little understood or utilized by teachers or students as a learning tool in traditional educational settings.