to it. It's just a matter of happenstance whether they end up finally seeing a patient in the future whose problem relates back to the conference topic. Otherwise, they don't study the material. They are certainly not tested on the material. They just listen, then they walk out." At a minimum, Larson would like to see something done to interrupt the forgetting, give a quiz at the end of a conference, and follow it with spaced retrieval practice. Quote, Make quizzing a standard part of the culture and the curriculum. You just know every week you're going to get in your email your 10 questions that you need to work through. Unquote. He asks, quote, How are we designing education and training systems that prevent or at least intervene in the amount of forgetting that goes on? And making sure they're systematic throughout the school in support of what we're trying to accomplish. As it stands now, medical resident programs are simply dictating. You have to have the curriculum. You have to have the conferences. And it ends there. They present these big conferences. They have all the faculty come through and give their talks. And in the end, what we actually accomplish is really kind of minimal. Unquote. These principles are broadly applicable. College football might seem an incongruous place to look for a learning model, but a conversation with coach Vince Dooley about the University of Georgia's practice regime provides an intriguing case. Dooley is authoritative on the subject. As head coach of Bulldogs football from 1964 to 1988, he piled up an astonishing 201 wins with only 77 losses and 10 tied games, winning six conference titles and a national championship. He went on to serve as the university's athletic director, where he built one of the most impressive athletics programs in the country. We asked coach Dooley how players go about mastering all the complexities of the game. His theories of coaching and training revolve around the weekly cycle of one Saturday game to the next. In that short period, there's a lot to learn. Studying the opposition's type of game in the classroom, discussing offensive and defensive strategies for opposing it, taking the discussion onto the playing field, breaking the strategies down to the movements of individual positions and trying them out, knitting the parts into a whole, and then repeating the moves until they run like clockwork. While all this is going on, the players must also keep their fundamental skills in top form, blocking, tackling, catching the ball, bringing the ball in, carrying the ball. Dooley believes that 1. You have to keep practicing the fundamentals from time to time, forever, so you keep them sharp. Otherwise, you're cooked. But 2. You need to change it up in practice, because too much repetition is boring. The position coaches work with players individually on specific skills, and then on how they're playing their positions during team practice. What else? There's practicing the kicking game. There's the matter of each player's mastery of the playbook. And there are the special plays from the team's repertoire that often makes the difference between winning and losing. In Dooley's narrative, the special plays stand as exemplars of spaced learning. They're practiced only on Thursdays, so there's always a week between sessions, and the plays are run in a varied sequence. With all this to be done, it's not surprising that a critical aspect of the team's success is a very specific daily and weekly schedule that interleaves the elements of individual and team practice. The start of every day's practice is strictly focused on the fundamentals of each player's position. Next, players practice in small groups, working on maneuvers involving several positions. These parts are gradually brought together and run as a team. Play is speeded up and slowed down, rehearsed mentally as well as physically. By midweek, the team is running the plays in real time, full speed. You're coming at it fast, and you've got to react fast, Dooley said. But as you get closer to game time, you slow it down again. Now, it's a kind of rehearsal without physical contact. The play basically starts out the same each time, but then what the opponent does changes it, so you've got to be able to adjust to that. You start into the motion and say, if they react like this, then this is what you would do. You practice adjustments. If you do it enough times in different situations, then you're able to do it pretty well in whatever comes up in the field. How does a player get on top of his playbook? He takes it home and goes over the plays in his mind. He may walk through them. Everything in practice can't be physically strenuous, Dooley said, or you'd wear yourself out. Quote, so if the play calls for you to step this way and then go the other way, you can rehearse that in your mind. Maybe just lean your body as if to go that way. And then if something happens where you have to adjust, you can do that mentally. By reading the playbook, rehearsing it in your mind, maybe taking a step or two to walk through it, you simulate something happening. So that kind of rehearsal is added to what you get in the classroom and on the field, end quote. The final quarterback meetings are held on Saturday morning, reviewing the game plan and running through it mentally. The offensive coaches can make all the plans they want to about the hypothetical game, but once play gets underway, the execution rests in the hands of the quarterback. For Coach Dooley's team, it's all there. Retrieval, spacing, interleaving, variation, reflection, and elaboration. The seasoned quarterback going into Saturday's game, mentally running through the plays, the reactions, the adjustments, is doing the same thing as the seasoned neurosurgeon who's rehearsing what's about to unfold in the operating room. The Takeaway Here's a quick rundown of what we know today about masked practice and its alternatives. Scientists will continue to deepen our understanding. We harbor deep convictions that we learn better through single-minded focus and dogged repetition, and these beliefs are validated time and again by the visible improvement that comes during practice, practice, practice. But scientists call this heightened performance during the acquisition phase of a skill momentary strength and distinguish it from underlying habit strength. The very techniques that build habit strength, like spacing, interleaving, and variation, slow visible acquisition and fail to deliver the improvement during practice that helps to motivate and reinforce our efforts. Cramming, a form of masked practice, has been likened to binge and purge eating. A lot goes in, but most of it comes right back out in short order. The simple act of spacing out study and practice in installments and allowing time to elapse between them makes both the learning and the memory stronger, in effect, building habit strength. How big an interval, you ask? The simple answer? Enough so that the practice doesn't become a mindless repetition. At a minimum, enough time so that a little forgetting has set in. A little forgetting between practice sessions can be a good thing if it leads to more effort in practice, but you do not want so much forgetting that retrieval essentially involves relearning the material. The time periods between sessions of practice let memories consolidate. Sleep seems to play a large role in memory consolidation. So practice with at least a day in between sessions is good. Something as simple as a deck of flashcards can provide an example of spacing. Between repetitions of any individual card, you work through many others. The German scientist Sebastian Leitner developed his own system for spaced practice of flashcards known as the Leitner box. Think of it as a series of four file card boxes. In the first are the study materials, be they musical scores, hockey moves, or Spanish vocabulary flashcards, that must be practiced frequently because you often make mistakes in them. In the second box are the cards you're pretty good at, and that box gets practiced less often than the first, perhaps by a half. The cards in the third box are practiced less often than those in the second, and so on. If you miss a question, make mistakes in the music, flub the one-touch pass, you move it up a box so you will practice it more often. The underlying idea is simply that the better your mastery, the less frequent the practice. But if it's important to retain, it will never disappear completely from your set of practice boxes. Beware of the familiarity trap, the feeling that you know something and no longer need to practice it. This familiarity can hurt you during self-quizzing if you take shortcuts. Doug Larson says, you have to be disciplined to say, all right, I'm going to make myself recall all of this, and if I don't, what did I miss? How did I not know that? Whereas if you have an instructor-generated test or quiz, suddenly, you have to do it. There's an expectation. You can't cheat. You can't take mental shortcuts around it. You simply have to do that. The nine quizzes Andy Sobel administers over the twenty-six meetings of his political economics course are a simple example of spaced retrieval practice—and of interleaving, because he rolls forward into each successive quiz questions pertaining to work from the beginning of the semester. Interleaving two or more subjects during practice also provides a form of spacing. Interleaving can also help you develop your ability to discriminate later between different kinds of problems and select the right tool from your growing toolkit of solutions. In interleaving, you don't move from a complete practice set of one topic to go to another. You switch before each practice is complete. A friend of ours describes his own experience with this, quote, I go to a hockey class and we're learning skating skills, puck handling, shooting, and I notice that I get frustrated because we do a little bit of skating and just when I think I'm getting it, we go to stick handling, and I go home frustrated saying, why doesn't this guy keep letting us do these things until we get it, unquote. This is actually the rare coach who understands that it's more effective to distribute practice across these different skills than polish each one in turn. The athlete gets frustrated because the learning's not proceeding quickly, but the next week he will be better at all aspects—the skating, the stick handling, and so on—than if he dedicated each session to polishing one skill. Like interleaving, varied practice helps learners build a broad schema, an ability to assess changing conditions and adjust responses to fit. Arguably, interleaving and variation help learners reach beyond memorization to higher levels of conceptual learning and application, building more rounded, deep, and durable learning—what in motor skills shows up as underlying habit strength. Something the researchers call blocked practice is easily mistaken for varied practice. It's like the old LP records that could only play their songs in the same sequence. In blocked practice, which is commonly but not only found in sports, a drill is run over and over. The player moves from one station to the next, performing a different maneuver at each station. That's how the LA Kings were practicing their one-touch pass before they got religion and started changing it up. It would be like always practicing flashcards in the same order. You need to shuffle your flashcards. If you always practice the same skill in the same way from the same place on the ice or field, in the same set of math problems, or during the same sequence in a flight simulator, you're starving your learning on short rations of variety. Spacing, interleaving, and variability are natural features of how we conduct our lives. Every patient visit or football game is a test and an exercise in retrieval practice. Every routine traffic stop is a test for a cop. And every traffic stop is different, adding to a cop's explicit and implicit memory, and if she pays attention, making her more effective in the future. The common term is learning from experience. Some people never seem to learn. One difference, perhaps, between those who do and don't is whether they have cultivated the habit of reflection. Reflection is a form of retrieval practice. What happened? What did I do? How did it work out? Enhanced with elaboration. What would I do differently next time? As Doug Larson reminds us, the connections between the neurons in the brain are very plastic. Quote, making the brain work is actually what seems to make a difference, bringing in more complex networks than using those circuits repeatedly, which makes them more robust. End quote. Chapter 4 Embrace Difficulties When Mia Blondetto, age 23, 1st Lieutenant, U.S. Marine Corps, was billeted to logistics in Okinawa, she had to get her ticket punched at jump school. Describing that moment two years later, she said, quote, I hate falling, that feeling in your chest. There's not a day in my life I wanted to jump out of an airplane. I wouldn't even go down a water slide until I was in middle school. But I was in charge of a platoon of Marines who rigged parachutes and jumped out of airplanes and dropped cargo. It's one of the most sought-out billets as a logistics officer. Very hard to get. My commanding officer said, you know, you will be air delivery platoon commander. If you don't want to do that, I'll put you somewhere else and we'll let the next guy have that job. There's no way I could let somebody else have this job that everybody wanted. So I looked him straight in the face and said, yes, sir, I'll jump out of planes. Mia is five feet, seven inches of blonde ambition. Her father, Frank, ex-Marine, is in awe. Quote, she'll do more pull-ups than most of the guys in her class. She has the Maryland state record in the bench press. She was six in the NCAA for powerlifting. Very soft-spoken. You just don't see it coming. Unquote. When we had Mia to ourselves, we asked her if Frank was blowing smoke. She laughed. Quote, he likes to exaggerate. Unquote. But when pressed, she admitted to the facts. Until recently, women in the Marines were required to do flex arm hangs instead of pull-ups, where the chin crosses the plate of the pull-up bar. But the newly toughened rules effective in 2014 require a minimum of three pull-ups, the same as the minimum for men. Targets are eight pull-ups for women, 20 for men. Mia does 13 and is shooting for 20. As a student at the Naval Academy, she qualified two years in a row for nationals in powerlifting. Three sets each of bench press, squats, and deadlifts, setting Maryland state records. So we know she's tough. An aversion to falling is an instinctual reflex for self-preservation. But her decision to take the assignment was a foregone conclusion, the kind of grit the Marines and the Blondettos are known for. Mia has a sister and two brothers. They're all active-duty Marines. As it turned out, the third time Mia threw herself out the jump door of a C-130 troop transport at 1,250 feet, she plummeted right onto another soldier's inflated parachute. But we're getting ahead of the story. We're interested in her jump school training because it's a great example of how some difficulties that elicit more effort and that slow down learning, spacing, interleaving, mixing up practice, and others will more than compensate for their inconvenience by making the learning stronger, more precise, and more enduring. Short-term impediments that make for stronger learning have come to be called desirable difficulties, a term coined by the psychologists Elizabeth and Robert Bjork. The Army's jump school at Fort Benning, Georgia, is designed to make sure that you get it right and get it done, and it's a model of learning through desirable difficulty. You are not allowed to carry a notebook and write notes. You listen, watch, rehearse, and execute. Jump school is a place where testing is the principal instructional medium, and the test is in the doing. And, like all things military, jump school adheres to a strict protocol. Get it right or get the boot. The parachute landing fall, or PLF in military parlance, is a technique of hitting the ground and rolling in a way that distributes the impact over the balls of your feet, the side of your calf, and the side of your thigh, the side of your hip, and the side of your back. There are six possible directions in which to execute the fall along the length of your body, determined by conditions in the movement, such as the direction of your drift, the terrain, wind, and whether you are oscillating as you approach the ground. In your first exposure to this essential skill of parachuting, you stand in a gravel pit where the PLF is explained and demonstrated. Then you try it. You practice falling along different planes of the body, you get corrective feedback, and you practice it again. Over the ensuing week, the difficulty is notched up. You stand on a platform, two feet off the ground. On the command Ready, you rock up on the balls of your feet, feet and knees together, arms skyward. On the command Land, you jump off the wall and execute your PLF. The test becomes more difficult. You clip yourself onto a zipline a dozen feet off the ground, grab onto an overhead T-bar and drift down to a landing site where, on command, you release and execute the PLF. You practice falling to the right and left, forward and backward, mixing it up. The difficulty is increased again. You climb to a platform