is comparable to what he's seeing in his upper-division classes. Quote, Anybody can design this structure. But I also realize that, oh God, if I'd done this years ago, I would have taught them that much more stuff. The interesting thing about adopting this strategy is I now recognize that as good a teacher as I might think I am, my teaching is only a component of their learning, and how I structure it has a lot to do with it, maybe even more. Unquote. Meanwhile, the course enrollment has grown to 185, and counting. Andy Sobel's example is anecdotal and likely reflects a variety of beneficial influences, not least being the cumulative learning effects that accrue like compounded interest when course material is carried forward in a regime of quizzes across an entire semester. Nonetheless, his experience squares with empirical research designed to tease apart the effects and nuances of testing. For example, in one experiment, college students studied prose passages on various scientific topics like those taught in college, and then either took an immediate recall test after the initial exposure or restudied the material. After a delay of two days, the students who took the initial test recalled more of the material than those who simply restudied it, 68% versus 54%. And this advantage was sustained a week later, 56% versus 42%. Another experiment found that after one week, a study-only group showed the most forgetting of what they initially had been able to recall, forgetting 52%, compared to a repeated testing group who forgot only 10%. Studies show that giving feedback strengthens retention more than testing alone does, and, interestingly, some evidence shows that delaying the feedback briefly produces better long-term learning than immediate feedback. This finding is counterintuitive, but it's consistent with researchers' discoveries about how we learn motor tasks, like making layups or driving a golf ball toward a distant green. In motor learning, trial and error with delayed feedback is a more awkward but effective way of acquiring a skill than trial and correction through immediate feedback. Immediate feedback is like the training wheels on a bicycle. The learner quickly comes to depend on the continued presence of the correction. In the case of learning motor skills, one theory holds that when there's immediate feedback, it comes to be part of the task, so that later, in a real-world setting, its absence becomes a gap in the established pattern that disrupts performance. Another idea holds that frequent interruptions for feedback make the learning sessions too variable, preventing establishment of a stabilized pattern of performance. In the classroom, delayed feedback also yields better long-term learning than immediate feedback does. In the case of the students studying prose passages on science topics, some were shown the passage again, even while they were asked to answer questions about it, in effect, providing them with continuous feedback during the test, analogous to an open-book exam. The other group took the test without the study material at hand, and only afterward were given the passage and instructed to look over their responses. Of course, the open-book group performed best on the immediate test, but those who got corrective feedback after completing the test retained the learning better on a later test. Delayed feedback on written tests may help because it gives the student practice that's spaced out in time. As discussed in the next chapter, spacing practice improves retention. Are some kinds of retrieval practice more effective for long-term learning than others? Tests that require the learner to supply the answer, like an essay or short answer test, or simply practice with flashcards, appear to be more effective than simple recognition tests, like multiple-choice or true-false tests. However, even multiple-choice tests, like those used at Columbia Middle School, can yield strong benefits. While any kind of retrieval practice generally benefits learning, the implication seems to be that where more cognitive effort is required for retrieval, greater retention results. Retrieval practice has been studied extensively in recent years, and an analysis of these studies shows that even a single test in a class can produce a large improvement in final exam scores, and gains in learning continue to increase as the number of tests increases. Whichever theories science eventually tells us are correct about how repeated retrieval strengthens memory, empirical research shows us that the testing effect is real, that the act of retrieving a memory changes the memory, making it easier to retrieve again later. How widely is retrieval practice used as a study technique? In one survey, college students were largely unaware of its effectiveness. In another survey, only 11% of college students said they used this study strategy. Even when they did report testing themselves, they mostly said they did it to discover what they didn't know, so they could study that material more. That's a perfectly valid use of testing, but few students realize that retrieval itself creates greater retention. Is repeated testing simply a way to expedite rote learning? In fact, research indicates that testing, compared to re-reading, can facilitate better transfer of knowledge to new contexts and problems, and that it improves one's ability to retain and retrieve material that is related but not tested. Further research is needed on this point, but it seems that retrieval practice can make information more accessible when it is needed in various contexts. Do students resist testing as a tool for learning? Students do generally dislike the idea of tests, and it's not hard to see why, in particular in the case of high-stakes tests like midterms and finals, where the score comes with significant consequences. Yet in all studies of testing that reported students' attitudes, the students who were tested frequently rated their classes more favorably at the end of the semester than those tested less frequently. Those who were frequently tested reached the end of the semester on top of the material and did not need to cram for exams. How does taking a test affect subsequent studying? After a test, students spend more time restudying the material they missed, and they learn more from it than do their peers who restudy the material without having been tested. Students whose study strategies emphasize re-reading but not self-testing show overconfidence in their mastery. Students who have been quizzed have a double advantage over those who have not, a more accurate sense of what they know and don't know and the strengthening of learning that accrues from retrieval practice. Are there any further indirect benefits of regular low-stakes classroom testing? Besides strengthening learning and retention, a regime of this kind of testing improves student attendance. It increases studying before class because students know they'll be quizzed, increases attentiveness during class if students are tested at the end of class, and enables students to better calibrate what they know and where they need to bone up. It's an antidote to mistaking fluency with the text, resulting from repeated readings, for mastery of the subject. Frequent low-stakes testing helps dial down test anxiety among students by diversifying the consequences over a much larger sample. No single test is a make-or-break event, and this kind of testing enables instructors to identify gaps in students' understanding and adapt their instruction to fill them. These benefits of low-stakes testing accrue whether instruction is delivered online or in the classroom. The Takeaway Practice at retrieving new knowledge or skill from memory is a potent tool for learning and durable retention. This is true for anything the brain is asked to remember and call up again in the future— facts, complex concepts, problem-solving techniques, motor skills. Effortful retrieval makes for stronger learning and retention. We're easily seduced into believing that learning is better when it's easier, but the research shows the opposite. When the mind has to work, learning sticks better. The greater the effort to retrieve learning, provided that you succeed, the more that learning is strengthened by retrieval. After an initial test, delaying subsequent retrieval practice is more potent for reinforcing retention than immediate practice because delayed retrieval requires more effort. Repeated retrieval not only makes memories more durable, but produces knowledge that can be retrieved more readily in more varied settings and applied to a wider variety of problems. While cramming can produce better scores on an immediate exam, the advantage quickly fades because there is much greater forgetting after rereading than after retrieval practice. The benefits of retrieval practice are long-term. Simply including one test, retrieval practice, in a class yields a large improvement in final exam scores, and gains continue to increase as the frequency of classroom testing increases. Testing doesn't need to be initiated by the instructor. Students can practice retrieval anywhere. No quizzes in the classroom are necessary. Think flashcards. The way second graders learn the multiplication tables can work just as well for learners at any age to quiz themselves on anatomy, mathematics, or law. Self-testing may be unappealing because it takes more effort than rereading, but as noted already, the greater the effort at retrieval, the more will be retained. Students who take practice tests have a better grasp of their progress than those who simply reread the material. Similarly, such testing enables an instructor to spot gaps and misconceptions and adapt instruction to correct them. Giving students corrective feedback after tests keeps them from incorrectly retaining material they have misunderstood and produces better learning of the correct answers. Students in classes that incorporate low-stakes quizzing come to embrace the practice. Students who are tested frequently rate their classes more favorably. What about Principal Roger Chamberlain's initial concerns about practice quizzing at Columbia Middle School, that it might be nothing more than a glorified path to rote learning? When we asked him this question after the study was completed, he paused for a moment to gather his thoughts. Quote, What I've really gained a comfort level with is this. For kids to be able to evaluate, synthesize, and apply a concept in different settings, they're going to be much more efficient at getting there when they have the base of knowledge and the retention, so they're not wasting time trying to go back and figure out what that word might mean or what that concept was about. It allows them to go to a higher level. End quote. Chapter 3 Mix Up Your Practice It may not be intuitive that retrieval practice is a more powerful learning strategy than repeated review and rereading. Yet most of us take for granted the importance of testing in sports. It's what we call practice, practice, practice. Well, here's a study that may surprise you. A group of 8-year-olds practiced tossing bean bags into buckets in gym class. Half of the kids tossed into a bucket 3 feet away. The other half mixed it up by tossing into buckets 2 feet and 4 feet away. After 12 weeks of this, they were all tested on tossing into a 3-foot bucket. The kids who did the best by far were those who practiced on 2- and 4-foot buckets, but never on 3-foot buckets. Why is this? We will come back to the bean bags, but first a little insight into a widely held myth about how we learn. The Myth of Massed Practice Most of us believe that learning is better when you go at something with single-minded purpose, the practice, practice, practice, that's supposed to burn a skill into memory. Faith in focused, repetitive practice of one thing at a time until we've got it nailed is pervasive among classroom teachers, athletes, corporate trainers, and students. Researchers call this kind of practice massed, and our faith rests in a large part on the simple fact that when we do it, we can see it making a difference. Nevertheless, despite what our eyes tell us, this faith is misplaced. If learning can be defined as picking up new knowledge or skills and being able to apply them later, then how quickly you pick something up is only part of the story. Is it still there when you need to use it out in the everyday world? While practicing is vital to learning and memory, studies have shown that practice is far more effective when it's broken into separate periods of training that are spaced out. The rapid gains produced by massed practice are often evident, but the rapid forgetting that follows is not. Practice that's spaced out, interleaved with other learning, and varied produces better mastery, longer retention, and more versatility. But these benefits come at a price. When practice is spaced, interleaved, and varied, it requires more effort. You feel the increased effort, but not the benefits the effort produces. Learning feels slower from this kind of practice, and you don't get the rapid improvements and affirmations you're accustomed to seeing from massed practice. Even in studies where the participants have shown superior results from spaced learning, they don't perceive the improvement. They believe they learned better on the material where practice was massed. Almost everywhere you look, you find examples of massed practice. Summer language boot camps, colleges that offer concentration in a single subject with the promise of fast learning, continuing education seminars for professionals where training is condensed into a single weekend. Cramming for exams is a form of massed practice. It feels like a productive strategy, and it may get you through the next day's midterm, but most of the material will be long forgotten by the time you sit down for the final. Spacing out your practice feels less productive for the very reason that some forgetting has set in and you've got to work harder to recall the concepts. It doesn't feel like you're on top of it. What you don't sense in the moment is that this added effort is making the learning stronger. Spaced practice. The benefits of spacing out practice sessions are long established, but for a vivid example, consider this study of 38 surgical residents. They took a series of four short lessons in microsurgery, how to reattach tiny vessels. Each lesson included some instruction followed by some practice. Half the docs completed all four lessons in a single day, which is the normal in-service schedule. The others completed the same four lessons but with a week's interval between them. In a test given a month after their last session, those whose lessons had been spaced a week apart outperformed their colleagues in all areas. Elapsed time to complete a surgery, number of hand movements, and success at reattaching the severed, pulsating aortas of live rats. The difference in performance between the two groups was impressive. The residents who had taken all four sessions in a single day not only scored lower on all measures, but 16% of them damaged the rats' vessels beyond repair and were unable to complete their surgeries. Why is spaced practice more effective than massed practice? It appears that embedding new learning in long-term memory requires a process of consolidation, in which memory traces, the brain's representations of the new learning, are strengthened, given meaning, and connected to prior knowledge, a process that unfolds over hours and may take several days. Rapid-fire practice leans on short-term memory. Durable learning, however, requires time for mental rehearsal and the other processes of consolidation. Hence, spaced practice works better. The increased effort required to retrieve the learning after a little forgetting has the effect of re-triggering consolidation, further strengthening memory. We explore some of the theories about this process in the next chapter. Interleaved practice Interleaving the practice of two or more subjects or skills is also a more potent alternative to massed practice, and here's a quick example of that. Two groups of college students were taught how to find the volumes of four obscure geometric solids, wedge, spheroid, spherical cone, and half cone. One group then worked a set of practice problems that were clustered by problem type, practiced four problems for computing the volume of a wedge, then four problems for a spheroid, etc. The other group worked the same practice problems, but the sequence was mixed, interleaved, rather than clustered by type of problem. Given what we've already presented, the results may not surprise you. During practice, the students who worked the problems in clusters, that is, massed, averaged 89% correct, compared to only 60% for those who worked the problems in a mixed sequence. But in the final test, a week later, the students who had practiced solving problems clustered by type averaged only 20% correct, while the students whose practice was interleaved averaged 63%. The mixing of problem types, which is what we call the interleaved practice, is what we call the interleaved practice.