screen at one end and objects around the room—a big blue mailbox, a fire hydrant, a doorway—that you could use for cover in dealing with what was happening on the screen. I remember walking toward the screen and the video simulating my coming up to the car as I did that—very realistic—and suddenly the trunk popped up and a guy with a shotgun rose out and shot me. Which to this day, every time I go up to a car on a traffic stop, I push down hard on the trunk to make sure it isn't open. And it's because of that one scenario in the training that I went through. Another firearm simulation was a domestic call, and it starts where I'm approaching the residence and there's a guy on his porch. The instant I show up, I see that he has a gun in his hand. I order him to drop it, and the first thing he does is turn and start walking away. And my thinking at that point is that I can't shoot this guy in the back, and there's nobody over there that looks to be in danger, so what am I going to do? In the time it takes me to process whether or not I should shoot this guy, he's already turned around and shot me, because my reaction was slower than his action. Action beats reaction every time. That's one mantra that's drilled into our minds. The firearm simulations can play out in a variety of ways, both deadly and peaceful. There's not so much a right or wrong answer to the situation as there's a complex set of factors, some of which, like whether the individual on the porch has a criminal history, may be known to the officer when she enters the scene. At the conclusion, the officer debriefs with her trainer, getting feedback. The exercise isn't all about technique. It's about clear thinking and appropriate reflexes, visual and verbal clues to watch for, possible outcomes, being clear about the appropriate use of deadly force, and finding the words after the fact that will account for the actions you have taken in the urgency of the moment. Simulation is not perfect. Johnson recounts how officers are trained to take a gun from an assailant at close quarters, a maneuver they practice by role-playing with a fellow officer. It requires speed and deftness, striking an assailant's wrist with one hand to break his grip while simultaneously wrestling the gun free with the other. It's a move that officers have been in the habit of honing through repetition, taking the gun, handing it back, taking it again, until one of their officers, on a call in the field, took the gun from an assailant and handed it right back again. In their mutual astonishment, the officer managed to re-seize the gun and hang on to it. The training regime had violated the cardinal rule that you should practice like you play because you will play like you practice. Sometimes the most powerful feedback for calibrating your sense of what you do and don't know are the mistakes you make in the field, assuming you survive them and are receptive to the lesson. Chapter 6 Get Beyond Learning Styles All learners are different. And all rising to a great place, as Francis Bacon tells us, is by a winding stair. Consider the story of Bruce Hendry, born in 1942, raised on the banks of the Mississippi north of Minneapolis by a machinist and a homemaker, just another American kid with skinned knees and fire in the belly to get rich. When we talk about self-made men, the story often sounds familiar. This is not that story. Bruce Hendry is self-made, but the story is in the winding stair, how he found his way and what it helps us understand about differences in how people learn. The idea that individuals have distinct learning styles has been around long enough to become part of the folklore of educational practice and an integral part of how many people perceive themselves. The underlying premise says that people receive and process new information differently. For example, some learn better from visual materials and others learn better from written text or auditory materials. Moreover, the theory holds that people who receive instruction in a manner that is not matched to their learning style are at a disadvantage for learning. In this chapter, we acknowledge that everyone has learning preferences, but we are not persuaded that you learn better when the manner of instruction fits those preferences. Yet there are other kinds of differences in how people learn that do matter. First, the story of Bruce, to help frame our argument. Active learning from the get-go. Part of the secret to Bruce is his sense from the earliest age of being the one in charge of Bruce. When he was two, his mother Doris told him he couldn't cross the street because a car might hit him. Every day, Bruce crossed the street and every day Doris gave him a spanking. He was born aggressive, Doris told friends. At eight, he bought a ball of string at a garage sale for a dime, cut it up, and sold the pieces for a nickel each. At ten, he got a paper route. At eleven, he added caddying. At twelve, he stuffed his pocket with thirty dollars in savings and sneaked out of his bedroom window before dawn with an empty suitcase and hitchhiked two hundred and fifty-five miles to Aberdeen, South Dakota. He stocked up on black cats, cherry bombs, and Roman candles—illegal in Minnesota—and hitched home before supper. Over the next week, Doris couldn't figure out why all the paper boys were dropping by the house for a few minutes and leaving. Bruce had struck gold. But the paper route supervisor found out and tipped off Bruce Sr. The father told the son if he ever did it again, he'd get the licking of his life. Bruce repeated the buying trip the following summer and got the promised licking. Quote, It was worth it, he says. He was thirteen, and he had learned a lesson about high demand and short supply. The way Bruce figured, rich people were probably no smarter than he was. They just had knowledge he lacked. Looking at how he went after the knowledge he sought will illustrate some of the learning differences that matter. One, of course, is taking charge of your own education—a habit with Bruce from age two that he has exhibited through the years with remarkable persistence. There are other signal behaviors. As he throws himself into one scheme after another, he draws lessons that improve his focus and judgment. He knits what he learns into mental models of investing, which he then uses to size up more complex opportunities and find his way through the weeds, plucking the telling details from masses of irrelevant information to reach the payoff at the end. These behaviors are what psychologists call rule learning and structure building. People who, as a matter of habit, extract underlying principles or rules from new experiences are more successful learners than those who take their experiences at face value, failing to infer lessons that can be applied later in similar situations. Likewise, people who single out salient concepts from the less important information they encounter in new material and who link these key ideas into a mental structure are more successful learners than those who cannot separate wheat from chaff and understand how the wheat is made into flour. When he was barely a teenager, Bruce saw a flyer advertising wooded lots on a lake in central Minnesota. Advised that no one ever lost money on real estate, he bought one. For four subsequent summers, with occasional help from his dad, he built a house on it, confronting each step in the process one at a time, figuring it out for himself or finding someone to show him how. To dig the basement, he borrowed a trailer and hooked it up to his 49 Hudson. He paid 50 cents for every load his friends excavated, shovel by shovel, and then charged the owner of a nearby lot that needed fill a dollar for it. He learned how to lay block from a friend whose father was in the cement business and then laid himself a foundation. He learned how to frame the walls from the salesman at the lumberyard. He plumbed the house and wired it the same way, a wide-eyed kid asking around how you do that sort of thing. The electrical inspector disapproved it, Bruce recalls. At the time, I figured it was because they wanted a union guy to do it. So I popped for a union guy to come up from the cities and redo all my wiring. Looking back, I'm sure what I had done was totally dangerous. He was 19 and a university student the summer he traded the house for the down payment on a fourplex in Minneapolis. It was a simple premise. Four apartments would generate four checks in the mail, month in and month out. Soon, besides his studies at university, he was managing the rental property, paying on the mortgage, answering midnight calls over broken plumbing, raising rents and losing tenants, trying to fill vacant units, and pouring in more money. He had learned how to parlay a vacant lot into a house and a house into an apartment complex. But in the end, the lesson proved a sour one, yielding more headache than reward. He sold the fourplex and swore off real estate for the next two decades. Out of college, Bruce went to work for Kodak as a microfilm salesman. In his third year, he was one of five top salesmen in the country. That was the year he found out how much his branch manager was making, less than Bruce made as a salesman if he factored in his company car and expense account. It pays better to be a rainmaker than a manager. Another lesson learned. Another step up Bruce's winding stair. He quit to join a brokerage firm and sell stocks. From this new vantage point, more lessons. If I brought a dollar into the firm in trading commissions, half went to the firm and half of the remaining half went to the IRS. To make real money, I had to focus more on investing my own money and less on making sales commissions. Oops, another lesson. Investing in stocks is risky. He lost as much investing his own money as he earned in commissions selling investments to his clients. You have no control of the downside. If a stock drops 50%, it has to go up by 100% just to break even. 100% is a lot harder to make than 50 is to lose. More knowledge banked. He bided his time, casting his eyes about for the insight he was after. Enter Sam Lepla. As Bruce tells it, Lepla was just a guy who roamed the Minneapolis skyways in those days from one investment firm to another, talking deals and giving advice. One day, he told Bruce about some bonds in a distressed company that were selling for 22 cents on the dollar. Quote, there were 22 points of unpaid back interest on these bonds, Bruce recalls. So when the company came out of bankruptcy, you'd collect the back interest. In other words, 100% of your investment cost, and you'd still own a paying bond. It amounted to free money. I didn't buy any, Bruce says, but I watched it, and it worked out exactly like Sam predicted. So I called him up and said, can you come down and tell me what you're doing? Lepla taught Bruce a more complex understanding of the relationships between price, supply, demand, and value than he'd learn from a suitcase full of fireworks. Lepla's modus operandi was drawn from the following precept. When a company runs into trouble, the first claim on its assets belongs not to its owners, the shareholders, but to its creditors, the suppliers, and bondholders. There's a pecking order to bonds. Those bonds paid first are called senior bonds. Any residual assets after the senior bonds are paid go to pay off the junior bonds. Junior bonds in a troubled company get cheap if investors fear there won't be enough assets left over to cover their value. But investors' fear, laziness, and ignorance can depress bond prices far below the worth of the underlying assets. If you can ascertain that actual worth, and you know the price of the bonds, you can invest with very little risk. Here was the kind of knowledge Bruce had been seeking. Florida real estate investment trusts were distressed at the time, so Sam and Bruce started looking into those, buying where they could see that the fire sale prices significantly discounted the underlying values. Quote, we'd buy these for $5 and sell them for $50. Everything we bought made money. They had a good run, but market prices caught up with values, and soon they were in need of another idea. At the time, eastern railroads were going bankrupt, and the federal government was buying their assets to form Conrail and Amtrak. As Bruce tells it, quote, one day Sam said, railroads go bankrupt every 50 years and no one knows anything about them. They're real complicated and they take years to work out. So we found a guy who knew about railroads, Barney Donahue. Barney was an ex-IRS agent and a railroad buff. If you've ever met a real railroad buff, they think it, they breathe it, they can tell you the weight of the track, and they can tell you the numbers on the engines. He was one of those guys, unquote. A central tenet of their investment model was to discover more than other investors knew about residual assets and the order in which the bonds were to be honored. Armed with the right knowledge, they could cherry-pick the underpriced junior bonds most likely to be paid off. Donahue checked out the different railroads and decided that the best one to invest in was the Erie Lackawanna, because it had the most modern equipment when it filed for bankruptcy. Hendry, Lepla, and Donahue dived in for a closer look. They traveled the entire length of the Erie's track to check its condition. They counted the equipment that remained, looked at its condition, and checked in Moody's transportation manuals to calculate values. Quote, you just do the arithmetic. What's an engine worth? A boxcar. A mile of track. The Erie had issued 15 different bonds over its 150 years in operation, and the value of each bond was dependent in part on where it stood in seniority compared to the others. Bruce's research turned up a little document in which the financial institutions had agreed to the sequence in which the bonds were to be paid off when the assets were liquidated. With a fix on the value of the company's assets, liabilities, and the bond structure, they knew what each class of bonds was worth. Bondholders who hadn't done this homework were in the dark. Senior bonds were selling at steeply discounted prices because they were so far down the food chain that investors doubted they would ever see their money. Bruce's calculations suggested otherwise, and he was buying. It's a longer story than we have space to tell. A railroad bankruptcy is an astonishingly convoluted affair. Bruce committed himself to understanding the entirety of the process better than anybody else. Then he knocked on doors, challenged the good old boy's power structure that was managing the proceedings, and eventually succeeded in getting appointed by the courts to chair the committee that represented the bondholders' interests in the bankruptcy process. When the Erie came out of bankruptcy two years later, he was made chairman and CEO of the company. He hired Barney Donahue to run it. Henry, Donahue, and the board guided the surviving corporation through the remaining lawsuits, and when the dust settled, Bruce's bonds paid twice face value, twenty times what he paid for some of the junior bonds he had purchased. The Erie Lackawanna, with all its complexity and David versus Goliath qualities, was just the kind of mess that became Bruce Henry's bread and butter. Running a company in trouble, burrowing into its assets and liabilities, reading the fine print on credit obligations, looking at its industry and where things are headed, understanding the litigation process, and wading into it armed with a pretty good idea of how things were going to play out. There are stories of other remarkable conquests. He took control of Kaiser Steel, staved off its liquidation, guided it out of bankruptcy as CEO, and was awarded 2% ownership of the new corporation. He interceded in the failure of First Republic Bank of Texas, and came out the other side with a 600% return on some of his first investments in the company. When manufacturers stopped making railroad boxcars because they were in oversupply, Bruce bought a thousand of the last ones built, collected 20% on his investment from the lease contracts that the railroads were bound to honor, and then sold the cars a year later when they were in short supply and fetching a handsome price. The story of Henry's rise is both familiar and particular. Familiar in the nature of the quest, and particular in the ways Bruce has gone to school on his ventures, building his own set of rules for what makes an investment opportunity attractive, pitching the rules into a template, and then finding new and different ways to apply it. When he is asked how he accounts for his success, the lessons he cites are deceptively simple. Go where the competition isn't, dig deep, ask the right questions, see the big picture, take risks, be honest. But these explanations aren't very satisfying. Among them is a more interesting story, the one we infer from reading between the lines. How he figured out what knowledge he needed, and how he then went after it. How early setbacks helped seed the skills of shrewder judgment, and how he developed a nose for value where others can only smell trouble. His gift for detecting value seems uncanny. His stories bring to mind the kid who, waking up on his fourth birthday to find a big pile of manure in the yard, dances around it crying, I'm pretty sure there's a pony in there somewhere. All people are different, a truism we quickly discern as children, comparing ourselves to siblings. It's evident in grade school, on the sports field.