tree under your eye at once. I measured off eight hundred and seventeen feet of the roadway, a foot representing a year, and at the beginning and end of each rain I drove a three-foot white pine stake in the turf by the roadside and wrote the name and dates on it." Twain and the children sketched icons for each of the monarchs, a whale for William the Conqueror, because both names begin with W, and because, quote, it's the biggest fish that swims, and William is the most conspicuous figure in English history, unquote, a hen for Henry the First, and so forth. Quote, "'We got a good deal of fun out of the history road, and exercise too. We trotted the course from the Conqueror to the study, the children calling out the names, dates, and length of rains as we passed the stakes. The children were encouraged to stop locating things as being over by the arbor or in the oak copse or up at the stone steps, and say instead that the things were in Stephen or in the Commonwealth or in George the Third. They got the habit without trouble. To have the long road mapped out with such exactness was a great boon for me, for I had the habit of leaving books and other articles lying around everywhere, and had not previously been able to definitely name the place, and so had often been obliged to go to fetch them myself, to save time and failure, but now I could name the rain I left them in and send the children." Unquote. Rhyme schemes can also serve as mnemonic tools. The peg method is a rhyme scheme for remembering lists. Each number, from 1 to 20, is paired with a rhyming concrete image. 1 is bun, 2 is shoe, 3 is tree, 4 is store, 5 is hive, 6 is tricks, 7 is heaven, 8 is gate, 9 is twine, 10 is pen. After 10, you add penny one and start over with three-syllable keywords. 11 is penny one, setting sun. 12 is penny two, airplane glue. 13 is penny three, bumblebee, and so on, up to 20. You use the rhyming concrete images as pegs on which to hang items you want to remember, such as the tasks you want to get done today. These 20 images stay with you, always at the ready, whenever you need help to remember a list of things. So when you're running errands, bun gives you the image of a hairstyle and reminds you to buy a hat for your ski trip. Shoe reminds you of being well-dressed, prompting you to pick up the dry-cleaning. Tree reminds you of family tree, queuing that birthday card for your cousin. The rhyming images stay the same while the associations they evoke change each time you need to hold a new list in mind. A song that you know well can provide a mnemonic structure, linking the lyrics in each musical phrase to an image that will cue retrieval of the desired memory. According to the anthropologist Jack Weatherford, the preeminent historian of Genghis Khan and the Mongol Empire, traditional poems and songs seem to have been used as mnemonic devices for sending messages accurately over vast distances from China at one end of the empire to Europe at the other end. The military were forbidden from sending written messages, and how they communicated remains a secret, but Weatherford thinks mnemonic devices were a likely method. He notes that the Mongol song known as the Long Song, for example, which describes the movement of a horse, can be sung in varying tones and trills so as to communicate movement through a particular location, like a crossing of the steppe or of the low mountains. The versatility of mnemonic devices is almost endless. What they hold in common is a structure of some kind—number scheme, travel route, floor plan, song, poem, aphorism, acronym—that is deeply familiar and whose elements can be easily linked to the target information to be remembered. To return to the psychology students preparing for their A-level exams, in a classroom at Bellarby's College in Oxford, a dark-haired 18-year-old whom we'll call Marlis sits down to write her A-2 exams in psychology. She will be asked to write five essays over the course of two testing sessions totaling three and a half hours. A-level courses are the British equivalent of advanced placement courses in the United States and are prerequisites for going on to university. Marlis is under a lot of pressure. For one thing, her exam scores will make the difference in whether or not she gets into the university of her choice. She has applied to the London School of Economics. To be assured a spot in a top university in the United Kingdom, students are required to take A-levels in three subjects, and the grades they must earn are published in advance by the universities. It's not at all unusual that they are required to earn an A-grade in each subject. If they earn less than the required grade, they must compete in a difficult clearing process by which the universities fill up their remaining spaces, a process that bears a lot in common with a lottery. If that weren't stress-inducing enough, the scope of the material for which Marlis must be prepared to show mastery in the next hour and a half is enormous. She and her fellow psychology students have studied six major topics in their second year of A-level preparations, including eating behavior, aggression, relationships, schizophrenia, anomalistic psychology, and the methods of psychological research. Within each of the first five topics, she must be prepared to write essays on seven different questions. Each essay must illuminate the answer in twelve short paragraphs that describe, for instance, the thesis or condition, the extant research and its significance, the countervailing opinions, any biological treatments, say, for schizophrenia, and how these relate to the foundational concepts of psychology that she mastered for her first year A-levels. So she faces five major topics times seven essay questions for each topic with a dozen succinct, well-argued paragraphs in each essay to show mastery of the subject. In other words, the universe of different essays she must master going into exams is a total of thirty-five, plus a series of short answers to questions on psychological research methods. Marlis knows which of the main topics will be the subject of today's exam, but she has no idea which essay questions will be assigned, so she's had to prepare herself to write on all of them. Many students who reach this point simply freeze. Despite being well-grounded in their material, the stakes at play can make their minds go blank the moment they confront the empty exam booklet and the proctor's ticking clock. That's where having taken the time to construct a memory palace proves as good as gold. It's not important that you understand the intricacies of British A-levels, just that they are difficult and highly consequential, which is why mnemonic devices are such a welcome tool at exam time. Today, the three test topics turn out to be evolutionary explanations of human aggression, the psychological and biological treatments for schizophrenia, and the success and failure of dieting. Okay, for aggression, Marlis has got the she-wolf with her hungry pups at the window of the Krispy Kreme shop on Castle Street. For schizophrenia, she's got the over-caffeinated barista at the Starbucks on High Street. For dieting, that would be the extremely large and aggressive potted plant inside the cafe Pret-a-Manger on Cornmarket Street. Excellent. She settles in her seat, sure of her knowledge and her ability to call it up. She tackles the dieting essay first. Pret-a-Manger is Marlis's memory palace for the safekeeping of what she has learned about the success and failure of dieting. Through a prior visit there, she has become thoroughly familiar with its spaces and furnishings and populated them with characters that are very familiar and vivid in her imagination. The names and actions of the characters now serve as cues to the dozen key points of her essay. She enters the shop in her mind. La Fern, the man-eating plant in Little Shop of Horrors, one of her favorite movies, is holding Marlis's friend, Herman, captive. Her vines wrap tightly around him, restraining him from a large dish of mac and cheese that sits just beyond his reach. Marlis opens her exam book and begins to write. Herman and Mac's restraint theory suggests that attempting not to overeat may actually increase the probability of overeating. That is, in restrained eaters, it is the disinhibition, loss of control, that is the cause of overeating. In this manner, Marlis works her way through the cafe and the essay. Herman breaks free of his restraints with a mighty roar and makes a beeline for the plate, practically inhaling the pasta to the point of bursting. Quote, Restraint theory received support in studies by Wardle and Beal, which found that obese women who restrained their eating actually ate more, inhaled the pasta, than obese women who took up exercise, and more than those who made no changes to their diet or lifestyle. However, Ogden argues, and so on. Marlis moves mentally through the cafe clockwise, encountering her cues for the boundary model of hunger and satiety, biases arising from cultural inclinations to obesity, the problems with diet data based on anecdotal evidence, metabolic differences related to high levels of lipoprotein lipase levels, little pink lemons, and the rest. From prêt-à-manger, she moves on to the Krispy Kreme shop, where a mental walk through the interior cues images that in turn cue what she's learned about the evolutionary explanations of aggression. Then, on to Starbucks, where the crazed barista and the shop's floor plan and clientele cue her through twelve paragraphs on the biological treatments of schizophrenia. Marlis's psychology teacher at Bellerby's College is none other than James Patterson, the boyish-looking Welshman who just happens to be a rising figure in world memory competitions. When teachers at Bellerby's fill out the paperwork to take students on field trips, it's typically to a lecture at the Said Business School, or perhaps to the Ashmolean Museum or Bodleian Library in Oxford. Not so with James. His paperwork will more likely seek approval to take students to any of half a dozen different cafes around town, comfortable settings where they can tap into their imaginations and construct their mnemonic schemes. In order for the students to nail all 35 essays securely in memory, they divide the topics into several groupings. For one group, they build memory palaces in cafes and at familiar locations around the Bellerby's campus. For another group, they use the PEG method. Still, other groups link to imagery in favorite songs and movies. We should make one important point, though. Before Patterson takes students on their mnemonic outings to construct memory palaces, he has already thoroughly covered the material in class so that they understand it. Among Patterson's former students who have graduated from Bellerby's and gone on to use the technique at university is Michelle Song-Hyung Kim, who described for us how she prepares for her university-level exams in psychology. First, she pulls together all her material from lecture slides, her outside reading, and her notes. She reduces this material to key ideas, not whole sentences. These form the plan for her essay. Next, she selects the site for her memory palace. She ties each key idea to a location in the palace that she can visualize in her mind's eye. Then, she populates each location with something crazy that will link her to one of the key ideas. When she sits in the exam hall and finds out the essay topics, she takes 10 minutes to mentally walk through the relevant memory palaces and lists the key ideas for each essay. If she's forgotten a point, she moves on to the next one and fills in the blank later. Once the plan is sketched out, she sets to work, free of the stressful anxiety that she won't remember what she's learned under the pressure of getting it right. What she does is not so different from what Mark Twain did when he used sketches to remember his speeches. Michela says that the idea of skipping a bullet point that she cannot remember, but will fill in later, would have been completely alien to her before learning to use mnemonics. But the techniques have given her the confidence to do this, knowing that the content will come to mind momentarily. The memory palace serves not as a learning tool, but as a method to organize what's already been learned so as to be readily retrievable at essay time. This is a key point and helps to overcome the typical criticism that mnemonics are only useful in rote memorization. To the contrary, when used properly, mnemonics can help organize large bodies of knowledge to permit their ready retrieval. Michela's confidence that she can pull up what she knows when she needs it is a huge stress buster and a time saver, James says. It's worth acknowledging that Krispy Kreme and Starbucks shops are not often called palaces, but the mind is capable of wondrous things. At Patterson's first World Memory Championships, that rookie year of 2006, he acquitted himself well by placing 12th, narrowly edging out the American Joshua Fore, who later published an account of his experiences with mnemonics in the book Moonwalking with Einstein. Patterson can memorize the sequence of playing cards in a shuffled deck in less than two minutes, hand you the deck, and then recite them back to you with his eyes closed. Give him an hour and he will memorize 10 or 12 decks and recite them back without error. Top champs can memorize a single deck in 30 seconds or less and upward of 25 decks in an hour, so Patterson has a ways to go. But he's a dedicated competitor and coming on strong, building his skills and memory tools. For example, just as the peg method involves memorizing an image for the digits 1 through 10, 1 is bun, 2 is shoe, etc., in order to remember much longer strings of digits, Patterson has committed to memory a unique image for every numeral from 0 to 1,000. This kind of achievement takes long hours of practice and intense focus. The kind of solitary striving that Anders Erikson tells us characterizes the acquisition of expertise. The thousand images locked into memory took Patterson a year to master, fitted in between the other demands of family, work, and friends. We caught up with Patterson in a school office and asked if he'd mind giving us a quick memory demonstration, to which he readily agreed. We recited once the random number string 615392611333517. Patterson listened closely and then said, OK, we'll use this space. He looked around at the fixtures. Quote, I see this water cooler here becoming the space shuttle, which is taking off just as an underground train comes shooting out of the bottom of the cooler. In the bookshelves there behind the cooler, I see the rapper Eminem having a gunfight with Leslie Nielsen from Naked Gun, while Lieutenant Columbo looks down on them. Unquote. How to make sense of this? He remembers digits in groups of three. Every three-digit number is a distinct image. For example, the number 615 is always a space shuttle. 392 is always the embankment tube station in London. 611 is Leslie Nielsen, 333 is Eminem, and 517 is Lieutenant Columbo. To make sense of these images, you need to understand another underlying mnemonic. For each numeral, 0 through 9, James has associated a sound of speech. The numeral 6 is always a sh or j sound. The 1 is always a t or d sound, and 5 is an l sound. So the image for the number 615 is sh-t-l or shuttle. Virtually every three-digit number from 000 to 999 lives in Patterson's mind as a unique image that is an embodiment of these sounds. For our spontaneous quiz, for example, he drew on these images in addition to the space shuttle. 392, 3 equals m, 9, b, 2, n, embankment. 611, 6, sh, 1, t, 1, t, shoot out. 333, 3m, 3m, 3m, Eminem. 517, 5, l, 1, t, 7, k, Lieutenant Columbo. In the memory championship event of spoken numbers, which are read aloud to contestants at the rate of 1 per second, Patterson can memorize and recite back 74 without error. And with much practice, he's raising that count. Quote, my wife calls herself a memory widow. Without mnemonic tools, the maximum number of digits most people can hold in working memory is about 7. That is why local telephone numbers were designed to be no more than 7 digits long. By the way, at the time of this writing, the world record in spoken digits, what psychologists call memory span, is 364 digits, held by Johannes Mallow of Germany. James is quick to acknowledge that he was first drawn to mnemonics as a shortcut for his studies. Quote, not the best of motives, he admits. He taught himself the techniques and became a bit of a slacker, walking into exams knowing he had all the names, dates, and related facts readily at hand.