levels attached to it and wired them to send impulses to a postage-stamped-sized strip of tape containing 144 microelectrodes placed on the woman's tongue. As she tilted her head, the electrodes sparkled on her tongue like effervescence, but in distinctive patterns reflecting the direction and angle of her head movements. Through practice wearing the device, the woman was gradually able to retrain her brain and vestibular system, recovering her sense of balance for longer and longer periods following the training sessions. Another patient, a 35-year-old man who had lost his sight at age 13, was outfitted with a small video camera mounted on a helmet and enabled to send pulses to the tongue. As Bakirita explained, the eyes are not what sees, the brain is. The eyes sense and the brain interprets. The success of this device relies on the brain learning to interpret signals from the tongue as sight. The remarkable results were reported in the New York Times. The patient found doorways, caught balls rolling toward him, and with his small daughter played a game of rock, paper, and scissors for the first time in 20 years. He said that with practice, the substituted sense gets better as if the brain were rewiring itself. In yet another application, interesting in light of our earlier discussions of metacognition, stimulators are being attached to the chests of pilots to transmit cockpit instrument readings, helping the brain to sense changes in pitch and altitude that the pilot's vestibular system is unable to detect under certain flight conditions. Neural cell bodies make up most of the part of our brains that scientists call the gray matter. What they call the white matter is made up of the wiring, the axons that connect to dendrites of other neural cell bodies, and the waxy myelin sheaths in which some axons are wrapped, like the plastic coating on a lamp cord. Both gray matter and white matter are the subject of intense scientific study as we try to understand how the components that shape cognition and motor skills work and how they change through our lives, research that has been greatly advanced by recent leaps in brain imaging technology. One ambitious effort is the Human Connectome Project, founded by the National Institutes of Health, to map the connections in the human brain. The word connectome refers to the architecture of the human neurocircuitry in the same spirit that genome was coined for the map of the human genetic code. The websites of participating research institutions show striking images of the fiber architecture of the brain, masses of wire-like human axons presented in neon colors to denote signal directions and bearing an uncanny resemblance to the massive wiring harnesses inside 1970s supercomputers. Early research findings are intriguing. One study at the University of California, Los Angeles, compared the synaptic architecture of identical twins, whose genes are alike, and fraternal twins, who share only some genes. This study showed what others have suggested, that the speed of our mental abilities is determined by the robustness of our neural connections. That this robustness, at the initial stages, is largely determined by our genes, but that our neural circuitry does not mature as early as our physical development, and instead continues to change and grow through our 40s, 50s, and 60s. Part of the maturation of these connections is the gradual thickening of the myelin coating of the axons. Myelination generally starts at the backs of our brains and moves toward the front, reaching the frontal lobes as we grow into adulthood. The frontal lobes perform the executive functions of the brain and are the location of the processes of high-level reasoning and judgment, skills that are developed through experience. The thickness of the myelin coating correlates with ability, and research strongly suggests that increased practice builds greater myelin along the related pathways, improving the strength and speed of the electrical signals and, as a result, performance. Increases in piano practice, for example, have shown correlated increases in the myelination of nerve fibers associated with finger movements and the cognitive processes that are involved in making music, changes that do not appear in non-musicians. The study of habit formation provides an interesting view into neuroplasticity. The neural circuits we use when we take conscious action toward a goal are not the same ones we use when our actions have become automatic, the result of habit. The actions we take by habit are directed from a region located deeper in the brain, the basal ganglia. When we engage in extended training and repetition of some kinds of learning, notably motor skills and sequential tasks, our learning is thought to be recoded in this deeper region, the same area that controls subconscious actions, such as eye movements. As a part of this process of recoding, the brain is thought to chunk motor and cognitive action sequences together so that they can be performed as a single unit, that is, without requiring a series of conscious decisions, which would substantially slow our responses. These sequences become reflexive, that is, they may start as actions we teach ourselves to take in pursuit of a goal, but they become automatic responses to stimuli. Some researchers have used the word macro, a simple computer app, to describe how this chunking functions as a form of highly efficient, consolidated learning. These theories about chunking as integral to the process of habit formation help explain the way in sports we develop the ability to respond to the rapid-fire unfolding events faster than we're able to think them through, the way a musician's finger movements can outpace his conscious thoughts, or the way a chess player can learn to foresee the countless possible moves and implications presented by different configurations of the board. Most of us display the same talent when we type. Another fundamental sign of the brain's enduring mutability is the discovery that the hippocampus, where we consolidate learning and memory, is able to generate new neurons throughout life. This phenomenon, called neurogenesis, is thought to play a central role in the brain's ability to recover from physical injury and in humans' lifelong ability to learn. The relationship of neurogenesis to learning and memory is a new field of inquiry, but already, scientists have shown that the activity of associative learning, that is, of learning and remembering the relationship between unrelated items, such as names and faces, stimulates an increase in the creation of new neurons in the hippocampus. This rise in neurogenesis starts before the new learning activity is undertaken, suggesting the brain's intention to learn, and continues for a period after the learning activity, suggesting that neurogenesis plays a role in the consolidation of memory and the beneficial effects that spaced and effortful retrieval practice have on long-term retention. Of course, learning and memory are neural processes. The fact that retrieval practice, spacing, rehearsal, rule learning, and the construction of mental models improve learning and memory is evidence of neuroplasticity, and is consistent with scientists' understanding of memory consolidation as an agent for increasing and strengthening the neural pathways by which one is later able to retrieve and apply learning. In the words of Anna Richard Barnett, human intellectual development is, quote, a lifelong dialogue between inherited tendencies and our life history. The nature of that dialogue is the central question we explore in the rest of this chapter. Is IQ mutable? IQ is a product of genes and environment. Compare it to height. It's mostly inherited, but over the decades as nutrition has improved, subsequent generations have grown taller. Likewise, IQs in every industrialized part of the world have shown a sustained rise since the start of standardized sampling in 1932, a phenomenon called the Flynn effect, after the political scientist who first brought it to worldwide attention. In the United States, the average IQ has risen 18 points in the last 60 years. For any given age group, an IQ of 100 is the mean score of those taking the IQ tests, so the increase means that having an IQ of 100 today is the intelligence equivalent of those with an IQ 60 years ago of 118. It's the mean that has risen, and there are several theories why this is so, the principal one being that schools, culture, e.g. television, and nutrition have changed substantially in ways that affect people's verbal and math abilities as measured by the subtests that make up the IQ test. Richard Nisbet, in his book Intelligence and How to Get It, discusses the pervasiveness of stimuli in modern society that didn't exist years ago, offering as one simple example a puzzle maze McDonald's included in its Happy Meals a few years ago that was more difficult than the mazes included in an IQ test for gifted children. Nisbet also writes about, quote, environmental multipliers, suggesting that a tall kid who goes out for basketball develops a proficiency in the sport that a shorter kid with the same aptitudes won't develop, just as a curious kid who goes for learning gets smarter than the equally bright but incurious kid who doesn't. The options for learning have expanded exponentially. It may be a very small genetic difference that makes one kid more curious than another, but the effect is multiplied in an environment where curiosity is easily piqued and readily satisfied. Another environmental factor that shapes IQ is socioeconomic status and the increased stimulation and nurturing that are more generally available in families who have more resources and education. On average, children from affluent families test higher for IQ than children from impoverished families, and children from impoverished families who are adopted into affluent families score higher on IQ tests than those who are not, regardless of whether the birth parents were of high or low socioeconomic status. The ability to raise IQ is fraught with controversy and the subject of countless studies reflecting wide disparities of scientific rigor. A comprehensive review published in 2013 of the extant research into raising intelligence in young children sheds helpful light on the issue, in part because of the strict criteria the authors established for determining which studies would qualify for consideration. The eligible studies had to draw from a general, non-clinical population, have a randomized experimental design, consist of sustained interventions, not of one-shot treatments or simply of manipulations during the testing experience, and use a widely accepted standardized measure of intelligence. The authors focused on experiments involving children from the prenatal period through age 5, and the studies meeting their requirements involved over 37,000 participants. What did they find? Inflammation affects IQ. Providing dietary supplements of fatty acids to pregnant women, breastfeeding women, and infants had the effect of increasing IQ by anywhere from 3.5 to 6.5 points. Certain fatty acids provide building blocks for nerve cell development that the body cannot produce by itself, and the theory behind the results is that these supplements support the creation of new synapses. Studies of other supplements such as iron and B-complex vitamins strongly suggested benefits, but these need validation through further research before they can be considered definitive. In the realm of environmental effects, the authors found that enrolling poor children in early education raises IQ by more than 4 points, and by more than 7 if the intervention is based in a center instead of in the home, where stimulation is less consistently sustained. Early education was defined as environmental enrichment and structured learning prior to enrollment in preschool. More affluent children, who are presumed to have many of these benefits at home, might not show similar gains from enrolling in early education programs. In addition, no evidence supports the widely held notion that the younger children are when first enrolled in these programs, the better the results. Rather, the evidence suggests, as John Brewer argues, that the earliest few years of life are not narrow windows for development that soon close. Gains in IQ were found in several areas of cognitive training. When mothers in low-income homes were given the means to provide their children with educational tools, books, and puzzles, and trained how to help their children learn to speak and identify objects in the home, the children showed IQ gains. When mothers of 3-year-olds in low-income families were trained to talk to their children frequently and at length, and to draw out the children with many open-ended questions, the children's IQs rose. Reading to a child age 4 or younger raises the child's IQ, especially if the child is an active participant in the reading, encouraged by the parent to elaborate. After age 4, reading to the child does not raise IQ, but continues to accelerate the child's language development. Preschool boosts a child's IQ by more than 4 points, and if the school includes language training, by more than 7 points. Again, there is no body of evidence supporting the conclusion that early education, preschool, or language training would show IQ gains in children from better-off families where they already benefit from the advantages of a richer environment. Brain training? What about brain training games? We've seen a new kind of business emerge, pitching online games and videos promising to exercise your brain like a muscle, building your cognitive ability. These products are largely founded on the findings of one Swiss study reported in 2008, which was very limited in scope and has not been replicated. The study focused on improving, quote, fluid intelligence, the facility for abstract reasoning, grasping unfamiliar relationships, and solving new kinds of problems. Fluid intelligence is one of two kinds of intelligence that make up IQ. The other is crystallized intelligence, the storehouse of knowledge we have accumulated through the years. It's clear that we can increase our crystallized intelligence through effective learning and memory strategies, but what about our fluid intelligence? A key determiner of fluid intelligence is the capacity of a person's working memory, the number of new ideas and relationships that a person can hold in mind while working through a problem, especially with some amount of distraction. The focus of the Swiss study was to give participants tasks requiring increasingly difficult working memory challenges, holding two different stimuli in mind for progressively longer periods of distraction. One stimulus was a sequence of numerals. The other was a small square of light that appeared in varying locations on a screen. Both the numerals and the locations of the square changed every three seconds. The task was to decide, while viewing a sequence of changed numerals and repositioned squares for each combination of numeral and square, whether it matched a combination that had been presented n times back in the series. The number n increased during the trials, making the challenge to working memory progressively more arduous. All the participants were tested on fluid intelligence tasks at the outset of the study. Then they were given these increasingly difficult exercises of their working memory over periods ranging up to 19 days. At the end of the training, they were retested for fluid intelligence. They all performed better than they had before the training, and those who had engaged in the training for the longest period showed the greatest improvement. These results showed for the first time that fluid intelligence can be increased through training. What's the criticism? The participants were few, only 35, and were all recruited from a similar, highly intelligent population. Moreover, the study focused on only one training task, so it's unclear to what extent it might apply to other working memory training tasks, or whether the results are really about working memory rather than some peculiarity of the particular training. Finally, the durability of the improved performance is unknown, and the results, as noted, have not been replicated by other studies. The ability to replicate empirical results is the bedrock of scientific theory. The website psychfiledrawer.org keeps a list of the top 20 psychological research studies that the site's users would like to see replicated, and the Swiss study is the first on the list. A recent attempt, whose results were published in 2013, failed to find any improvements to fluid intelligence as a result of replicating the exercises in the Swiss study. Interestingly, participants in the study believed that their mental capacities had been enhanced, a phenomenon the authors describe as illusory. However, the authors also acknowledge that an increased sense of self-efficacy can lead to greater persistence in solving difficult problems, encouraged by the belief that training has improved one's abilities. The brain is not a muscle, so strengthening one's skill does not automatically strengthen others.