Following the presentation of a key concept within a given lecture, the instructor asked students to write to learn. Students generated their own written summaries of the key ideas, for example, restating concepts in their own words and elaborating on the concepts by generating examples of them. For other key concepts presented during the lecture, students were shown a set of slides summarizing the concepts and spent a few minutes copying down key ideas and examples verbatim from the slide. What was the result? On exams administered during the semester, the students were asked questions that assessed their understanding of the key concepts that they had worked on learning. They scored significantly, approximately half a letter grade better on the ones they had written about in their own words than those they had copied, showing that it was not simply exposure to the concepts that produced the learning benefit. In follow-up tests, approximately two months later, to measure retention, the benefits of writing to learn as a form of reflection had dropped but remained robust. Failure and the Myth of Errorless Learning In the 1950s and 1960s, the psychologist B.F. Skinner advocated the adoption of errorless learning, methods in education, in the belief that errors by learners are counterproductive and result from faulty instruction. The theory of errorless learning gave rise to instructional techniques in which learners were spoon-fed new material in small bites and immediately quizzed on them while they still remained on the tongue, so to speak, fresh in short-term memory and easily spit out onto the test form. There was virtually no chance of making an error. Since those days, we've come to understand that retrieval from short-term memory is an ineffective learning strategy and that errors are an integral part of striving to increase one's mastery over new material. Yet in our Western culture, where achievement is seen as an indicator of ability, many learners view errors as failure and do what they can to avoid committing them. The aversion to failure may be reinforced by instructors, who labor under the belief that when learners are allowed to make errors, it's the errors that they will learn. This is a misguided impulse. When learners commit errors and are given corrective feedback, the errors are not learned. Even strategies that are highly likely to result in errors, like asking someone to try to solve a problem before being shown how to do it, produce stronger learning and retention of the correct information than more passive learning strategies provided there is corrective feedback. Moreover, people who are taught that learning is a struggle that often involves making errors will go on to exhibit a greater propensity to tackle tough challenges and will tend to see mistakes not as failures but as lessons and turning points along the path to mastery. To see the truth of this, look no further than the kid down the hall who is deeply absorbed in working his avatar up through the levels of an action game on his Xbox video console. A fear of failure can poison learning by creating aversions to the kinds of experimentation and risk-taking that characterize striving or by diminishing performance under pressure, as in a test setting. In the latter instance, students who have a high fear of making errors when taking tests may actually do worse on a test because of their anxiety. Why? It seems that a significant portion of their working memory capacity is expended to monitor their performance—how am I doing? Am I making mistakes?—leaving less working memory capacity available to solve the problems posed by the test. Working memory refers to the amount of information you can hold in mind while working through a problem, especially in the face of distraction. Everyone's working memory is severely limited, some more than others, and larger working memory capacity correlates with higher IQs. To explore this theory about how fear of failure reduces test performance, sixth-graders in France were given very difficult anagram problems that none of them could solve. After struggling unsuccessfully with the problems, half of the kids received a ten-minute lesson in which they were taught that difficulty is a crucial part of learning, errors are natural and to be expected, and practice helps, just as in learning to ride a bicycle. The other kids were simply asked how they had gone about trying to solve the anagrams. Then both groups were given a difficult test whose results provided a measure of working memory. The kids who had been taught that errors are a natural part of learning showed significantly better use of working memory than did the others. These children did not expend their working memory capacity in agonizing over the difficulty of the task. The theory was further tested in variations of the original study. The results support the finding that difficulty can create feelings of incompetence that engender anxiety, which in turn disrupts learning, and that quote, students do better when given room to struggle with difficulty. These studies point out that not all difficulties in learning are desirable ones. Anxiety, while taking a test, seems to represent an undesirable difficulty. These studies also underscore the importance of learners understanding that difficulty in learning new things is not only to be expected but can be beneficial. To this point, the French study stands on the shoulders of many others. Among the foremost being the works of Carol Dweck and of Anders Ericsson, both of whom we discuss in Chapter 7 in relation to the topic of increasing intellectual abilities. Dweck's work shows that people who believe that their intellectual ability is fixed from birth, wired in their genes, tend to avoid challenges at which they may not succeed, because failure would appear to be an indication of lesser native ability. By contrast, people who are helped to understand that effort and learning change the brain, and that their intellectual abilities lie to a large degree within their own control, are more likely to tackle difficult challenges and persist at them. They view failure as a sign of effort and as a turn in the road rather than as a measure of inability and the end of the road. Anders Ericsson's work investigating the nature of expert performance shows that to achieve expertise requires thousands of hours of dedicated practice in which one strives to surpass one's current level of ability, a process in which failure becomes an essential experience on the path to mastery. The study of the French sixth-graders received wide publicity and inspired the staging of a Festival of Errors by an elite graduate school in Paris, aimed at teaching French schoolchildren that making mistakes is a constructive part of learning, not a sign of failure but of effort. Festival organizers argued that modern society's focus on showing results has led to a culture of intellectual timorousness, starving the kind of intellectual ferment and risk-taking that produced the great discoveries that mark French history. It doesn't require a great conceptual leap to get from Paris' Festival of Errors to San Francisco's FailCon, where technology entrepreneurs and venture capitalists meet once a year to study failures that gave them critical insights they needed in order to pivot in their business strategies so as to succeed. Thomas Edison called failure the source of inspiration and is said to have remarked, quote, I've not failed, I've just found 10,000 ways that don't work. He argued that perseverance in the face of failure is the key to success. Failure underlies the scientific method, which has advanced our understanding of the world we inhabit. The qualities of persistence and resiliency, where failure is seen as useful information, underlie successful innovation in every sphere and lie at the core of nearly all successful learning. Failure points to the need for redoubled effort or liberates us to try different approaches. Steve Jobs, in his remarks to the Stanford University graduating class of 2005, spoke of being fired at age 30 in 1985 from Apple Computer, which he had co-founded, quote, I didn't see it then, but it turned out that getting fired from Apple was the best thing that could have ever happened to me. The heaviness of being successful was replaced by the lightness of being a beginner again, less sure about everything. It freed me to enter one of the most creative periods of my life. It's not the failure that's desirable. It's the dauntless effort despite the risks, the discovery of what works and what doesn't, that sometimes only failure can reveal. It's trusting that trying to solve a puzzle serves us better than being spoon-fed the solution, even if we fall short in our first attempts at an answer. An Example of Generative Learning As we said earlier, the process of trying to solve a problem without the benefit of having been taught how is called generative learning, meaning that the learner is generating the answer rather than recalling it. Generation is another name for old-fashioned trial and error. We're all familiar with the stories of skinny kids in Silicon Valley garages messing around with computers and coming out billionaires. We would like to serve up a different kind of example here, Minnesota's Bonnie Blodgett. Bonnie is a writer and a self-taught ornamental gardener in a constant argument with a voice in her head that keeps nattering about all the ways her latest whim is sure to go haywire and embarrass her. While she is a woman of strong aesthetic sensibilities, she is also one of epic doubts. Her learning style might be called leap before you look because if you look first, you probably won't like what you see. Her garden writing appears under the name The Blundering Gardener. This moniker is a way of telling her voices of doubt to take a hike because whatever the consequences of the next whim, she's already rolling up her sleeves. Quote, Blundering means that you get going on your project before you have figured out how to do it in the proper way, before you know what you're getting into. For me, the risk of knowing what you're getting into is that it becomes an overwhelming obstacle to getting started. Bonnie's success shows how struggling with a problem makes for strong learning and how a sustained commitment to advancing in a particular field of endeavor through trial-and-error effort leads to complex mastery and greater knowledge of the interrelationships of things. When we spoke, she had just traveled to southern Minnesota to meet with a group of farmers who wanted her gardening insights on a gamut of issues ranging from layout and design to pest control and irrigation. In the years since she first sank her spade, Bonnie's garden writing has won national recognition and found a devoted following far and wide through many outlets, and her garden has become a destination for other gardeners. She came to ornamental gardening about the time she found herself eyeballing middle age. She had no training, just a burning desire to get her hands dirty, making beautiful spaces on the corner lot of the home she shares with her husband in a historic neighborhood of St. Paul. Quote, The experience of creating beauty calms me down, she says, but it's strictly a discovery process. She has always been a writer, and some years after having launched herself into the garden, she began publishing The Garden Letter, a quarterly for northern gardeners, in which she chronicles her exploits, mishaps, lessons, and successes. She writes the same way that she gardens, with boldness and self-effacing humor, passing along the entertaining snafus and unexpected insights that are the fruits of experience. In calling herself the blundering gardener, she is giving herself and us, her readers, permission to make mistakes and get on with it. Note that in writing about her experiences, Bonnie is engaging two potent learning processes beyond the act of gardening itself. She is retrieving the details and the story of what she has discovered, say about an experiment in grafting two species of fruit trees, and then she is elaborating by explaining the experience to her readers, connecting the outcome to what she already knows about the subject or has learned as a result. Her leap-taking impulses have taken her through vast swaths of the plant kingdom, of course, and deeply into the Latin nomenclature and the classic horticultural literature. These impulses have also drawn her into the aesthetics of space and structure and the mechanics thereof—building stone walls, digging and wiring water features, putting a cupola on the garage, building paths, stairs, and gates, ripping out a Gothic picket fence and reusing the wood to create something more open and with stronger horizontal lines to pull down the soaring verticality of her three-story Victorian house and connect it with the gardens that surround it, making the outdoor spaces airier and more easily seen from the street, while still circumscribed so as to impart that essential sense of privacy that makes a garden a room of its own. Her spaces are idiosyncratic and asymmetrical, giving the illusion of having evolved naturally, but they cohere through the repetition of textures, lines, and geometry. A simple example of how she has backed into more and more complex mastery is the manner in which she came to embrace plant classification and the Latin terminology. When I started, the world of plants was a completely foreign language to me. I would read gardening books and be completely lost. I didn't know what plant names were, common or Latin. I wasn't thinking about learning the stuff, ever. I'm like, why would you want to do that? Why wouldn't you just get outside and dig a hole and put something in it? What she relished were pictures that gave her ideas and passages of text where the designers used phrases like, my process, in describing how they had achieved the desired effect. It was the possessive pronoun, my process, that affirmed Bonnie in her headlong rush to learn by doing. The notion is that every gardener's process is uniquely his or her own. Bonnie's process did not involve taking direction from experts, much less mastering the Linnaean taxonomy or the Latin names of what she stuck in holes and dragged her water hose to. But as she thrashed around, working to achieve in dirt the magical spaces that danced in her mind, she came to Latin and Linnaeus, despite herself. Quote, you begin to discover that the Latin names are helpful. They can give you a shortcut to understanding the nature of the plants, and they can help you remember. Tardiva, which is a species name, comes after hydrangea, which is a genus, unquote. Bonnie had taken Latin in high school, along with French and, of course, English, and the cues to those memories began to reawaken. Quote, I can easily see that tardiva means late, like tardy. The same word comes after many plant varieties, so you see the genus, and then the species is tardiva, and now you know that particular plant is a late bloomer. So you begin to realize that the Latin names are a way of helping you remember, and you find yourself using them more and more. Also, you remember plants better, because it's second nature to you that Procumbus means prostrate, crawling on the ground. It makes sense. So now it's not so hard to remember that particular species name when it's attached to a genus. It's also important to know the Latin names because then you can be absolutely specific about a plant. Plants have common names, and common names are regional. Actaea racemosa has a common name of black cohosh, but it's also known as snakeroot, and those names are often given to other plants. There's only one Actaea racemosa. Unquote. Gradually, and despite her inclination to resist, she came to grasp the classical taxonomy of ornamental plants and to appreciate how Linnaeus's schema frames family connections and communicates attributes. Linnaeus said that the farmers she had recently met were particularly interested in what she has learned about the advantages of composting and earthworms over chemical fertilizers for building nutrients and soil aeration, and how to get strong root growth on low rations of water through a homemade system of drip irrigation. She paused in recounting her meeting with them, reflecting on how all of this knowledge had sneaked up on her. It was never something she set out to conquer. Quote, look, blundering's really not a bad thing. It's a good thing in that you get stuff done. A lot of people, when they contemplate the enormity of the task and they see all that's entailed, they're stopped in their tracks. Of course, in some settings, like learning to jump out of airplanes and walk away with your life, blundering is not the optimal learning strategy. Desirable difficulties. Elizabeth and Robert Bjork, who coined the phrase desirable difficulties, write that difficulties are desirable because, quote, they trigger encoding and retrieval processes that support learning, comprehension, and remembering. If, however, the learner does not have the background knowledge or skills to respond to them successfully, they become undesirable difficulties. Definitive scientists know from empirical studies that testing, spacing, interleaving, variation, generation, and certain kinds of contextual interference lead to stronger learning and retention. Beyond that, we have an intuitive sense of what kinds of difficulties are undesirable, but for lack of the needed research, we cannot yet be definitive. Clearly, impediments that you cannot overcome are not desirable. Outlining a lesson in a sequence different from the one in the textbook