instructional organizers, for example, topic outlines and schematic illustrations, and resources for special groups like those in remedial and gifted education. Neuroscientists using new imaging techniques and other tools are advancing our understanding of brain mechanisms that underlie learning, but we're still a very long way from knowing what neuroscience will tell us about how to improve education. How is one to know whose advice to take and how best to go about learning? It's wise to be skeptical. Advice is easy to find, only a few mouse clicks away. Yet, not all advice is grounded in research, far from it. Nor does all that passes as research meet the standards of science, such as having appropriate control conditions to assure that the results of an investigation are objective and generalizable. The best empirical studies are experimental in nature. The researcher develops a hypothesis and then tests it through a set of experiments that must meet rigorous criteria for design and objectivity. In the chapters that follow, we have distilled the findings of a large body of such studies that have stood up under review by the scientific community before being published in professional journals. We are collaborators in some of these studies, but not the lion's share. Where we're offering theory rather than scientifically validated results, we say so. To make our points, we use, in addition to tested science, anecdotes from people like Matt Brown, whose work requires mastery of complex knowledge and skills, stories that illustrate the underlying principles of how we learn and remember. Discussion of the research studies themselves is kept to a minimum, but you will find many of them cited in the notes at the end of the book if you care to dig further. People misunderstand learning. It turns out that much of what we've been doing as teachers and students isn't serving us well, but some comparatively simple changes could make a big difference. People commonly believe that if you expose yourself to something enough times, say a textbook passage or a set of terms from an eighth-grade biology class, you can burn them into memory. Not so. Many teachers believe that if they make learning easier and faster, the learning will be better. Much research turns this belief on its head. When learning is harder, it's stronger and lasts longer. It's widely believed by teachers, trainers, and coaches that the most effective way to master a new skill is to give it dogged, single-minded focus, practicing over and over until you've got it down. Our faith in this runs deep because most of us see fast gains during the learning phase of massed practice. What's apparent from the research is that gains achieved during massed practice are transitory and melt away quickly. The finding that re-reading textbooks is often labor in vain ought to send a chill up the spines of educators and learners because it's the number one study strategy of most people, including more than 80% of college students in some surveys, and is central in what we tell ourselves to do during the hours we dedicate to learning. Re-reading has three strikes against it. It is time-consuming, it doesn't result in durable memory, and it often involves a kind of unwitting self-deception as growing familiarity with the text comes to feel like mastery of the content. The hours immersed in re-reading can seem like due diligence, but the amount of study time is no measure of mastery. You needn't look far to find training systems that lean heavily on the conviction that mere exposure leads to learning. Consider Matt Brown, the pilot. When Matt was ready to advance from piston planes, he had a whole new body of knowledge to master in order to get certified for the business jet he was hired to pilot. We asked him to describe this process. His employer sent him to 18 days of training, 10 hours a day, in what Matt called the firehose method of instruction. The first seven days straight were spent in the classroom, being instructed in all the plane systems, electrical, fuel, pneumatics, and so on, how these systems operated and interacted, and all their fail-safe tolerances like pressures, weights, temperatures, and speeds. Matt is required to have at his immediate command about 80 different, quote, memory action items, actions to take without hesitation or thought in order to stabilize the plane the moment any one of a dozen or so unexpected events occur. It might be a sudden decompression, a thrust reverser coming unlocked in flight, an engine failure, an electrical fire. Matt and his fellow pilots gazed for hours at mind-numbing PowerPoint illustrations of their airplanes' principal systems. Then, something interesting happened. About the middle of day five, Matt said, they flash a schematic of the fuel system on the screen with its pressure sensors, shut-off valves, ejector pumps, bypass lines, and on and on, and you're struggling to stay focused. Then, this one instructor asks us, has anybody here had the fuel filter bypass light go on in flight? This pilot across the room raises his hand, so the instructor says, tell us what happened. And suddenly, you're thinking, whoa, what if that was me? So, this guy was at 33,000 feet or something, and he's about to lose both engines because he's got a fuel without antifreeze in it, and his filters are clogging with ice. You hear that story, and believe me, that schematic comes to life and sticks with you. Jet fuel can commonly have a little water in it, and when it gets cold at high altitude, the water will condense out, and it can freeze and block the line. So, whenever you refuel, you make good and sure to look for a sign on the fuel truck saying the fuel has prissed in it, which is an antifreeze, and if you ever see that light go on in flight, you're going to get yourself down to some warmer air in a hurry. Learning is stronger when it matters, when the abstract is made concrete and personal. Then, the nature of Matt's instruction shifted. The next 11 days were spent in a mix of classroom and flight simulator training. Here, Matt described the kind of active engagement that leads to durable learning, as the pilots had to grapple with their aircraft to demonstrate mastery of standard operating procedures, respond to unexpected situations, and drill on the rhythm and physical memory of the movements that are required in the cockpit for dealing with them. A flight simulator provides retrieval practice, and the practice is spaced, interleaved, and varied, and involves, as far as possible, the same mental processes Matt will invoke when he's at altitude. In a simulator, the abstract is made concrete and personal. A simulator is also a series of tests, in that it helps Matt and his instructors calibrate their judgment of where he needs to focus to bring up his mastery. In some places, like Matt Brown's flight simulator, teachers and trainers have found their way to highly effective learning techniques, yet in virtually any field, these techniques tend to be the exception, and firehose lectures, or their equivalent, are too often the norm. In fact, what students are advised to do is often plain wrong. For instance, study tips published on a website at George Mason University include this advice, quote, The key to learning something well is repetition. The more times you go over the material, the better chance you have of storing it permanently, end quote. Another from Dartmouth College website suggests, quote, If you intend to remember something, you probably will, unquote. A public service piece that runs occasionally in the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, offering study advice, shows a kid with his nose buried in a book, Concentrate, the caption reads, focus on one thing and one thing only, repeat, repeat, repeat. Repeating what you have to remember can help burn it into your memory. Belief in the power of rereading, intentionality, and repetition is pervasive. But the truth is, you usually can't embed something in memory simply by repeating it over and over. This tactic might work when looking up a phone number and holding it in your mind while punching it into your phone, but it doesn't work for durable learning. A simple example reproduced on the internet, search penny memory test, presents a dozen different images of a common penny, only one of which is correct. As many times as you've seen a penny, you're hard-pressed to say with confidence which one it is. Similarly, a recent study asked faculty and students who worked in the psychology building at UCLA to identify the fire extinguisher closest to their office. Most failed the test. One professor, who had been at UCLA for 25 years, left his safety class and decided to look for the fire extinguisher closest to his office. He discovered that it was actually right next to his office door, just inches from the doorknob he turned every time he went into his office. Thus, in this case, even years of repetitive exposure did not result in his learning where to grab the closest extinguisher if his wastebasket caught fire. Early Evidence The fallacy in thinking that repetitive exposure builds memory has been well established through a series of investigations going back to the mid-1960s, when the psychologist Endel Tulving at the University of Toronto began testing people on their ability to remember lists of common English nouns. In the first phase of the experiment, the participants simply read a list of paired items six times. For example, a pair on the list might be chair 9. They did not expect a memory test. The first item in each pair was always a noun. After reading the listed pair six times, participants were then told that they would be getting a list of nouns that they would be asked to remember. For one group of people, the nouns were the same ones they had just read six times in the prior reading phase. For another group, the nouns to be learned were different from those they had previously read. Remarkably, Tulving found that the two groups' learning of the nouns did not differ. The learning curves were statistically indistinguishable. Intuition would suggest otherwise, but prior exposure did not aid later recall. Mere repetition did not enhance learning. Subsequent studies by many researchers have pressed further into questions of whether repeated exposure or longer periods of holding an idea in mind contribute to later recall, and these studies have confirmed and elaborated on the findings that repetition by itself does not lead to good long-term memory. These results led researchers to investigate the benefits of rereading texts. In a 2008 article in Contemporary Educational Psychology, Washington University scientists reported on a series of studies they conducted at their own school and at the University of New Mexico to shed light on rereading as a strategy to improve understanding and memory of prose. Like most research, these studies stood on the shoulders of earlier work by others. Some showed that when the same text is read multiple times, the same inferences are made and the same connections between topics are formed, and others suggested modest benefits from rereading. These benefits have been found in two different situations. In the first, some students read and immediately reread study material, whereas other students read the material only once. Both groups took an immediate test after reading, and the group who had read twice performed a bit better than the group who had read once. However, on a delayed test, the benefit of immediate rereading had worn off, and the re-readers performed at the same level as the one-time readers. In the other situation, students read the material the first time and then waited some days before they reread it. This group, having done spaced readings of the text, performed better on the test than the group who did not reread the material. Subsequent experiments at Washington University, aimed at teasing apart some of the questions the earlier studies had raised, assessed the benefits of rereading among students of differing abilities in a learning situation paralleling that faced by students in classes. A total of 148 students read five different passages taken from textbooks and Scientific American. The students were at two different universities. Some were high ability readers and others were low ability. Some students read the material only once and others read it twice in succession. Then all of them responded to questions to demonstrate what they had learned and remembered. In these experiments, multiple readings in close succession did not prove to be a potent study method for either group at either school in any of the conditions tested. In fact, the researchers found no rereading benefit at all under these conditions. What's the conclusion? It makes sense to reread a text once if there's been a meaningful lapse of time since the first reading, but doing multiple readings in close succession is a time-consuming study strategy that yields negligible benefits at the expense of much more effective strategies that take less time. Yet, surveys of college students confirm what professors have long known. Highlighting, underlining, and sustained pouring over notes and texts are the most used study strategies by far. Illusions of knowing. If rereading is largely ineffective, why do students favor it? One reason may be that they're getting bad study advice, but there's another subtler way they're pushed toward this method of review, the phenomenon mentioned earlier. Rising familiarity with a text and fluency in reading it can create an illusion of mastery. As any professor will attest, students work hard to capture the precise wording of phrases they hear in class lectures, laboring under the misapprehension that the essence of the subject lies in the syntax in which it's described. Mastering the lecture or the text is not the same as mastering the ideas behind them. However, repeated reading provides the illusion of mastery of the underlying ideas. Don't let yourself be fooled. The fact that you can repeat the phrases in a text or your lecture notes is no indication that you understand the significance of the precepts they describe, their application, or how they relate to what you already know about the subject. Too common is the experience of a college professor answering a knock on her office door, only to find a first-year student in distress, asking to discuss his low grade on the first test in introductory psychology. How is it possible? He attended all the lectures and took diligent notes on them. He read the text and highlighted the critical passages. How did he study for the test, she asks? Well, he'd gone back and highlighted his notes, and then reviewed the highlighted notes and his highlighted text material several times until he felt he was thoroughly familiar with all of it. How could it be that he had pulled a D on the exam? Had he used the set of key concepts in the back of each chapter to test himself? Could he look at a concept like conditioned stimulus, define it, and use it in a paragraph? While he was reading, had he thought of converting the main points of the text into a series of questions and then later tried to answer them while he was studying? Had he at least rephrased the main ideas in his own words as he read? Had he tried to relate them to what he already knew? Had he looked for examples outside the text? The answer was no, in every case. He sees himself as the model student, diligent to a fault, but the truth is he doesn't know how to study effectively. The illusion of mastery is an example of poor metacognition. What we know about what we know, being accurate in your judgment of what you know and don't know is critical for decision making. The problem was famously and prophetically summed up by Secretary of State Donald Rumsfeld in a 2002 press briefing about U.S. intelligence on Iraq's possible possession of weapons of mass destruction. Quote, There are known knowns. There are things we know that we know. There are known unknowns. That is to say, there are things that we now know we don't know, but there are also unknown unknowns. There are things we do not know we don't know. End quote. The emphasis here is ours. We make it to drive home the point that students who don't quiz themselves, and most do not, tend to overestimate how well they have mastered class material. Why? When they hear a lecture or read a text that is a paragon of clarity, the ease with which they follow the argument gives them the feeling that they already know it and don't need to study it. In other words, they tend not to know what they don't know. When put to the test, they find they cannot recall the critical ideas or apply them in a new context. Likewise, when they've re-read their lecture notes and text to the point of fluency, their fluency gives them the false sense that they're in possession of the underlying content, principles, and implications that constitute real learning, confident that they can recall them at a moment's notice. The upshot is that even the most diligent students are often hobbled by two liabilities. A failure to know the areas where their learning is weak, that is, where they need to do more work to bring up their knowledge, and a preference for study methods that create a false sense of mastery. Knowledge. Not sufficient, but necessary. Albert Einstein declared, Creativity is more important than knowledge. And the sentiment appears to be widely shared by college students, if their choice in t-shirt proclamations is any indication. And why wouldn't they seize on the sentiment? It embodies an obvious and profound truth, for without creativity, where would our scientific