that high-structure classes help students who lack a history of using effective learning techniques and habits to develop them and succeed in rigorous settings. Kathleen McDermott, Psychology Professor, Washington University at St. Louis. Kathleen McDermott administers daily low-stakes quizzes in a university course on human learning and memory. It's a class of 25 students that meets twice a week for 14 weeks, minus midterms and a final exam. She gives a four-item quiz in the last three to five minutes of every class. The questions hit the high points of the lecture, the readings, or both. If students have understood the material, they will get all four answers right, but they'll have to think in order to do it. Anything covered in the course to date is fair game for a quiz, and she will sometimes draw from past material that she feels the students haven't fully grasped and need to review. McDermott sets the ground rules very clearly at the start of the term. She lays out the research on learning and the testing effect and explains why the quizzes are helpful, even if they don't feel helpful. Students are allowed to drop four quizzes across the semester. In exchange, absences need not be justified and no missed quizzes will be made up. Students initially are not happy about the quiz regime, and in the first few weeks of the term, McDermott will get email from students explaining why they had a legitimate excuse for an absence and should be allowed to make up a missed quiz. She reiterates the terms. Four free absences, no make-ups. McDermott says the quizzes provide an incentive for students to attend class and give students a way to contribute to their grade on a daily basis if they answer four out of four questions correctly. By the end of the semester, her students say that the quizzes have helped them keep up with the course and discover when they are getting off track and need to bone up. Quote, the key with quizzes is to establish very clear ground rules for the student and make them manageable for the professor, McDermott says. As a student, you're either there and you take it or you're not. For the professor, no hassling over make-up tests. The quizzes in totality count for 20% of a student's grade in the course. In addition, McDermott gives two midterm exams and a final. The last two exams are cumulative. Having cumulative exams reinforces learning by requiring students to engage in spaced review. Columbia, Illinois Public School District. As recounted in Chapter 2, we have worked with teachers in a middle school in Columbia, Illinois to test the effects of integrating low-stakes quizzing into the curriculum. Regular quizzing and other forms of retrieval practice have been adopted by teachers in the school who were a part of the research study and by others who were not, but who observed the beneficial results. The initial research project has since been extended into history and science classes in the district's high school, where frequent retrieval practice is being used both to bolster learning and to help teachers focus instruction on areas where student understanding and performance need to be improved. The Illinois State Board of Education has adopted new math and English language arts standards for K-12 education in line with the Common Core State Standards Initiative, led by the National Governors Association and endorsed by the nation's Secretary of Education. Common Core establishes standards for college and career readiness that students should be able to meet on graduation from high school. The Columbia School District, like others, is redesigning its curriculum and its tests to be more rigorous and to engage students in more writing and analysis work with the aim of promoting the higher-level skills of conceptual understanding, reasoning, and problem-solving that will enable students to meet the standards established by the state. As one example of this overhaul, the sciences curriculum is being vertically aligned so that the students are re-exposed to a subject at various stages of their school careers. The result is more spaced and interleaved instruction. In physical sciences, for instance, middle school students may learn to identify the six basic machines, inclined plane, wedge, screw, lever, wheel, and axle, and pulley, and how they work, and then may return to these concepts in subsequent grades, delving into the underlying physics and how these basic tools can be combined and applied to solve different problems. Tips for trainers Here are some ways trainers are using the same principles as those who teach in schools in a variety of less structured and non-classroom settings. In-service training. Licensed professionals in many fields must earn continuing education credits to keep their skills current and maintain their licenses. As the pediatric neurologist Doug Larson describes in Chapter 3, this kind of training for doctors is typically compressed into a weekend symposium out of respect for participants' busy schedules, set at a hotel or resort, and structured around meals and PowerPoint lectures. In other words, the strategies of retrieval practice, spacing, and interleaving are nowhere to be seen. Participants are lucky to retain much of what they learn. If you see yourself in this scenario, there are a few things you might consider doing. One, get a copy of the presentation materials and use them to quiz yourself on the key ideas, much as Nathaniel Fuller quizzes himself on the arc of a play, his lines, the many layers of character. Two, schedule follow-up emails to appear in your inbox every month or so with questions that require you to retrieve the critical learning you gained from the seminar. Three, contact your professional association and ask them to consider revamping their approach to training along the lines outlined in this book. The testing effect forms the basis of a new commercial training platform called QStream that helps trainers send learners periodic quizzes via their mobile devices to strengthen learning through spaced retrieval practice. Similarly, an emerging platform called Osmosis uses mobile and web-based software to provide learners access to thousands of crowdsourced practice questions and explanations. Osmosis combines the testing effect, spacing, and social networking to facilitate what its developers called quote, student-driven social learning. QStream, qstream.com, and Osmosis, osmose-it.com suggest interesting possibilities for redesigning in-service training for professionals. Many other companies are developing similar programs. Kathy Meixner, business coach. The Meixner group is a consulting shop based in Portland, Oregon that helps companies identify growth strategies and improve their sales tactics. Kathy Meixner fries big fish and little. One of the big fish added 21 million dollars to its annual revenue as a result of hooking up with Meixner. One of the small ones, inner gate acupuncture, profiled at the close of this chapter, learned how to establish a solid business management footing under a clinical practice whose growth was outpacing its control systems. We're interested in Meixner because the coaching techniques she has developed over her career line up so well with the learning principles described in this book. In short, Meixner sees her role as helping the client dig past the symptoms of a problem to discover its root causes and then to generate possible solutions and play out the implications of different strategies before committing to them. Meixner told us, quote, if you hand people the solution, they don't need to explore how you got to that solution. If they generate the solution, then they're the ones who are traveling down that road. Should they go left or right? We discuss the options, unquote. Meixner's years of experience working with clients in many different fields helps her see around corners where the hazards lie. She often uses role-playing to simulate problems, getting her clients to generate solutions, try them out, get feedback, and practice what works. In other words, she introduces the difficulties that make the learning stronger and more accurately reflect what the client will encounter out in the marketplace. Farmer's insurance. Corporate sales training can be complicated. Typically, it's about corporate culture, beliefs, and behavior, and learning to promote and protect the brand. It's also technical, learning the features and advantages of the products, and it's partly strategic, learning about the target market and how to generate prospects and make sales. At Farmer's Insurance, whose principal sales force is a cadre of about 14,000 exclusive independent agents, training must also equip the company reps to become successful as entrepreneurs, building and managing their own agency. Farmer's sells property and casualty policies and investment products like annuities and mutual funds to the tune of about $20 billion a year. Describing the full scope of their training could fill volumes, but we'll focus on the way Farmer's brings new agents on board, training them in the four areas of sales, marketing systems, business planning, and advocacy of the brand. The company's new agent training is an excellent example of interleaving the learning and practice of different but related topics so that each adds meaning to the other, broadening and deepening competency. The company recruits upward of 2,000 new agents annually. Many leave traditional jobs elsewhere, drawn to the rewards of running their own business and the opportunity to represent an established product line. Newly appointed agents arrive at one of two training campuses for an intensive week-long program of learning exercises that spiral upward in sophistication. At the start, participants are given a pile of magazines, scissors, and marking pens with which to illustrate on poster board what being a successful Farmer's agent would look like to them personally five years down the road. For some, the poster shows fancy houses and cars. For others, kids are being sent to college and aging parents are being cared for. The point is simple. If your definition of success requires, say, $250,000 a year in revenues and 2,500 policies in force, we can help you work backward to set the metrics for where you need to be in four years, in three years, and even three months from now. The image on the poster shows where you're headed. The metrics are your roadmap and the skills that are learned over the coming days and months are the tools that will enable you to make the journey. From here, the week is not so much about teaching from the top down. There are no PowerPoint lectures as such, but about learning from the bottom up as in, quote, what knowledge and skills do I need in order to succeed, unquote. The learning unfolds through a series of exercises that cycle through the principal topics of sales, marketing systems, business planning, and advocacy of the company's values and its brands, returning time and again to each, requiring that participants recall what they have learned earlier and apply it in a new enlarged context. For example, when participants first arrive, they're assigned to a red, blue, or green group. The red group is instructed to go meet people in the room. The blue group is instructed to go learn three things about somebody in the room. The green group is instructed to ask another member of the class about his or her family, prior occupation, favorite forms of recreation, and what he or she enjoys most. When the class reconvenes, they share what they have learned about others, and it is quickly evident that the green group, which had a structure for talking to others, learned much more than did their peers. When talking about sales later in the week, the question comes up. What's an effective way to learn about a prospective customer? Somebody will recall the initial get-acquainted exercise that proved so fruitful, asking about one's family, occupation, recreation, and enjoyment. That icebreaker now morphs into a handy tool for getting to know a prospective client, and it gets an acronym, F.O.R.E. Throughout the week, the four principal training topics are repeatedly touched on. A point is made and the exercises shift to related questions. In one session, participants brainstorm what kinds of marketing and development strategies might generate the flow of leads they need in order to meet sales targets. An effective sales and marketing system has a structure called 5-4-3-2-1. Five new business marketing initiatives every month, four cross-marketing and four retention programs in place, three appointments scheduled every day, two appointments kept, prospects often have to reschedule, one new customer sold, on average two policies per sale. At 22 working days a month, that's about 500 new policies in a year, making 2,500 over the five-year horizon of the agent's vision. Practice is a central learning strategy. For example, they practice how to respond to a sales lead. Trying to sell the company's products is how they learn about selling, but it's also how they learn about the products they're selling, not by sitting in front of PowerPoint slides gazing at long lists of product features. You be the agent, I'll be the customer, then we'll switch. Interwoven with these exercises are others that help the new agents learn about the company's history, what it stands for, and the value of its products in people's lives. For instance, through stories of how it has helped people recover from catastrophes like Hurricane Katrina. Given the emphasis on marketing and the limited resources new agents have to invest, how does an agent determine which strategies will pay? The question goes out, what's a reasonable return to expect from a direct mail campaign? The agents mull it over and hazard guesses. Usually, one or more of the agents will have had direct mail marketing experience and offer the sobering answer, returns are closer to 1% than the 50% many had guessed. Once you turn up a lead, how do you discover needs he or she has that the company's products can meet? They return to the handy acronym F.O.R.E. Now, the habit of asking about one's family, occupation, recreation, and enjoyment becomes something even more potent than a tool for getting acquainted. It provides an opening into four of the most important realms of a prospect's life, where insurance and financial products can help that person protect his or her assets and achieve his or her financial goals. At each pivot from one subject back to another, understanding deepens and new skills take form. In this way, through generation, spaced practice, and interleaving of the essential core curriculum, with an eye always to the five-year vision and roadmap, new agents learn what they need to do and how in order to thrive as part of the farmer's insurance family. Jiffy Lube If you don't expect innovations in training to spring from your local service garage, Jiffy Lube may surprise you. An integrated suite of educational courses under the felicitous name Jiffy Lube University is helping the company's franchisees win customers, reduce employee turnover, broaden their service offerings, and boost sales. Jiffy Lube is a network of more than 2,000 service centers in the United States and Canada that provide oil changes, tire rotation, and other automotive services. Although the company is a subsidiary of Shell Oil Company, every outlet is owned and operated by an independent franchisee who hires employees to serve customers. The rapid oil change business, like most others, has had to adjust to changing conditions in the marketplace and advances in technology. Synthetic lubricants have made oil changes less frequent, and because cars have become more complicated, garage employees need higher levels of training to understand diagnostic codes and provide appropriate services. No employee may work on a customer's car until he or she has been certified as proficient. For this, they enter Jiffy Lube University, For this, they enter Jiffy Lube University, a web-based learning platform. Certification starts with interactive e-learning, with frequent quizzing and feedback to learn what a particular job entails and how it's to be performed. When employees score 80% or better on an exam, they are eligible to begin training on the job, practicing new skills by following a written guide that breaks each service activity into its component steps. The steps may number as many as 30 and are performed as part of a team, often involving call and response, for example, between a technician working from the top side of an engine and another underneath. A supervisor coaches the employee and rates his or her performance on each step. When the technician demonstrates mastery, certification is recorded in his or her permanent file, signed by the supervisor. Technicians must recertify every two years to keep their mastery up to snuff and adapt to operational and technical changes. Higher-level jobs for advanced services, like brake repair or running engine diagnostics, are trained in the same manner. The e-learning and on-the-job training are active learning strategies that incorporate various forms of quizzing, feedback, and spaced and interleaved practice. All progress is displayed by computer on a virtual dashboard that provides an individualized learning plan, enabling an employee to track his or her performance, focus on skills that need to be raised, and monitor his or her progress against the company's completion schedule. Jiffy Lube employees are typically 18 to 25 years old and filling their first job. As a technician is certified in one job, he or she begins training in another until he or she has trained in all store positions.