chapter, we present effective study strategies. Students will benefit from teachers who help them understand these strategies and stick with them long enough to experience their benefits, which may initially appear doubtful. Create desirable difficulties in the classroom. Where practical, use frequent quizzing to help students consolidate learning and interrupt the process of forgetting. Make the ground rules acceptable to your students and yourself. Students find quizzing more acceptable when it is predictable and the stakes for any individual quiz are low. Teachers find quizzing more acceptable when it is simple, quick, and does not lead to negotiating make-up quizzes. For one example, consider the way Kathleen McDermott, whose work we described below, uses daily quizzing in her university class on human learning and memory. Create study tools that incorporate retrieval practice, generation, and elaboration. These might be exercises that require students to wrestle with trying to solve a new kind of problem before coming to the class where the solution is taught. Practice tests that the students can download and use to review material and to calibrate their judgments of what they know and don't know. Writing exercises that require students to reflect on past lesson material and relate it to other knowledge or other aspects of their lives. Exercises that require students to generate short statements that summarize the key ideas of recent material covered in a text or lecture. Make quizzing material and practice exercises count toward the course grade, even if for very low stakes. Students in classes where practice exercises carry consequences for the course grade learn better than those in classes where the exercises are the same but carry no consequences. Design quizzing and exercises to reach back to concepts and learning covered earlier in the term so that retrieval practice continues and the learning is cumulative, helping students to construct more complex mental models, strengthen conceptual learning, and develop deeper understanding of the relationships between ideas or systems. For an example, listen to Chapter 2, how Andy Sobel uses cumulative, low-stakes quizzing in his university-level course in political economics. Space, interleave, and vary topics and problems covered in class so that students are frequently shifting gears as they have to, quote, reload what they already know about each topic in order to figure out how the new material relates or differs. Be transparent. Help your students understand the ways you have incorporated desirable difficulties into your lessons and why. Be upfront about some of the frustrations and difficulties this kind of learning entails and explain why it's worth persisting. Consider having them read the profile earlier in this chapter of the medical student Michael Young who vividly describes the difficulties and ultimate benefits of using these strategies. Mary Pat Wenderoth, Biology Professor, University of Washington. Mary Pat Wenderoth introduces desirable difficulties in her classes to help students master their coursework. She also works at helping students learn how to be effective at managing their own learning, to be the capable student within the professional that they envision becoming. Along that path, she tackles yet another challenge, helping students learn to judge where their grasp of course material stands on Bloom's taxonomy of learning and how to rise to the levels of synthesis and evaluation. Bloom's taxonomy classifies cognitive learning on six levels. It was developed in 1956 by a committee of educators chaired by the psychologist Benjamin Bloom. The six levels range from gaining knowledge, the most fundamental level, to developing comprehension of the underlying facts and ideas, being able to apply learning to solve problems, being able to analyze ideas and relationships so as to make inferences, being able to synthesize knowledge and ideas in new ways, and at the most sophisticated level, being able to use learning to evaluate opinions and ideas and make judgments based on evidence and objective criteria. Here are some of the main techniques Wenderoth uses. Transparency At the outset, Wenderoth teaches her students about the testing effect, the principle of desirable difficulties, and the perils of illusions of knowing. She promises to make her instructional philosophy transparent and to model these principles in class. As she explained to us recently, quote, the whole idea of the testing effect is that you learn more by testing yourself than by rereading. Well, it's very hard to get students to do that because they've been trained for so long to keep reading and reading the book. I can't tell you how many times the students come to me and they show me their textbook and it's highlighted in four different colors. I say to them, I can tell you have done a lot of work and that you really want to succeed in this class because you have blue and yellow and orange and green highlighter on your book. And then I have to try to tell them that any more time spent on this after the first time was a waste. They're like, how is that possible? I say, what you have to do is you read a little bit and then you have to test yourself. But they don't quite know how to do that. So I model it in class for them. Every five minutes or so, I throw out a question on the material we just talked about. And I see them start to look through their notes. I say, stop, do not look at your notes. Just take a minute to think about it yourself. I tell them our brains are like a forest and your memory is in there somewhere. You're here and the memory is over there. The more times you make a path to that memory, the better the path is. So the next time you need the memory, it's going to be easier to find it. But as soon as you get your notes out, you have short circuited the path. You are not exploring for the path anymore. Someone has told you the way, unquote. At other times, Wenderoth will pose a question to the class and ask them to think about it. She has students write three possible answers on the whiteboard up front and then vote on which answer they think is correct by raising the number of fingers that corresponds with the answer on the board. She'll instruct students to find somebody with fingers, quote, different from yours and talk to them and figure out who has the correct answer, unquote. Wenderoth gives her students a new way to think about learning, and she gives them a new vocabulary for describing setbacks. When students trip over an exam question, they'll commonly accuse the test of containing trick questions. When the student blames the test, she says, it's not a good meeting ground for solving the problem. But now, students come to see her after a disappointing exam and say, I have the illusion of knowing. How do I get better? That's a problem Wenderoth can help with. Testing groups. Wenderoth has transformed class study groups into testing groups. In a study group, the person who knows the most talks and the others listen. The emphasis is on memorizing things. However, in a testing group, they all wrestle with a question together without opening the textbook. Quote, everybody has bits of information, and you talk with your colleagues and figure it out, unquote. The emphasis is on exploration and understanding. Wenderoth will ask students in a testing group what ideas they don't feel really clear on. Then she'll send one student to the whiteboard to try to explain the concept. As the student struggles, perhaps putting up the pieces of the answer she knows, the rest of the group are instructed to test her by asking questions whose answers will lead her to the larger concept. Throughout, all textbooks remain closed. Free recall. Wenderoth assigns her students to spend ten minutes at the end of each day sitting with a blank piece of paper on which to write everything they can remember from class. They must sit for ten minutes. She warns that it will be uncomfortable. They will run out of ideas after two minutes, but they must stick it out. At the end of ten minutes, they are to go to their class notes and find out what they remembered and what they forgot, and to focus on the material they forgot. What they glean from this exercise guides their notes and questions for the next class. Wenderoth finds that the free recall exercise helps students pull learning forward and develop a more complex understanding of how the material interrelates. Summary Sheets Every Monday, Wenderoth's students are required to turn in a single sheet of certain dimensions on which they have illustrated the prior week's material in drawings annotated with key ideas, arrows, and graphs. She is teaching physiology, which is about how things work. So the summaries take on the form of large cartoons, dense with call-outs, blow-ups, directional arrows, and the like. The sheets help her students synthesize a week's information, thinking through how systems are connected. This is causing this, which causes this, which feeds back on those. We use a lot of arrows in physiology. The students can work with each other. I don't care. The sheet they bring in just has to be their own. Learning Paragraphs From time to time on a Friday, if she doesn't feel she's overburdening them, Wenderoth will assign students to write low-stakes, quote, learning paragraphs, for which she poses a question and asks the students to prepare a five- or six-sentence response. A question might be, How is the GI tract like the respiratory system? Or You just got your test back. What would you do differently next time? The point is to stimulate retrieval and reflection, and to capture a week's learning before it is lost to the countless other concerns and diversions of college life. Quote, What I've found over the years is, if I don't do anything before the test, they don't do anything until the day before the test, unquote. The learning paragraphs also give her science majors practice in writing a passage of clear prose. She reads through the responses and makes a point to comment on them in class so that students know they're being read. Bloom's Taxonomy of Learning To remove some of the abstraction from Bloom's taxonomy, Wenderoth has translated her class material into the different levels of the taxonomy on an answer key to her tests. That is, for any given question, she provides a different answer for each level of the taxonomy, one that reflects learning at the level of knowledge, a more thorough answer that reflects understanding, a yet more complex answer that reflects analysis, and so on. When students get their tests back, they also receive the answer key and are asked to identify where their answers fell on the taxonomy, and to think about what they need to know in order to respond at a higher level of learning. Closing the Achievement Gap in the Sciences Wenderoth and her colleagues have experimented with class structure and the principles of active learning to help close the achievement gap in the sciences. Poorly prepared students seldom survive entry-level science courses. As a result, even students whose interests and aptitudes might lead them to successful science careers never get through the door. For whatever reason, these students do not have a history from high school or family life of learning how to succeed in these highly challenging academic settings. For most of us who have found our way into the sciences, Wenderoth says, anytime we fell, there was somebody around to help us up or to say, this is how you get up. You were taught that when things don't go well, you keep working anyway. You persevere. In their experiments, Wenderoth and her colleagues have compared the results of low-structure classes, traditional lecturing, and high-stakes midterm and final exams with high-structure classes, daily and weekly low-stakes exercises to provide constant practice in the analytical skills necessary to do well on exams. They also teach students the importance of having a, quote, growth mindset. See the work of Carol Dweck discussed in Chapter 7. That is, that learning is hard work and that struggle increases intellectual abilities. The results? High-structure classes in a gateway biology course significantly reduced student failure rates compared to low-structure classes, narrowing the gap between poorly-prepared students and their better-prepared peers, while at the same time showing exam results at higher levels on Bloom's Taxonomy. Moreover, it's not just whether the student completes the practice exercises that matters. In the classes where exercises count toward the course grade, even at very low stakes, students achieve higher success over the course of the term compared to students in classes where the exercises are the same but carry no consequences for the grade. Quote, We talked to the students about how these are the habits of mind, Wenderoth says. This is the discipline that you have to have in order to succeed in the sciences. They've never thought about that, that every discipline has a culture. We teach them to think like the professionals they want to become, and when they fall, we show them how to get up again, unquote. Michael D. Matthews, Psychology Professor, U.S. Military Academy at West Point. The pedagogical philosophy at West Point is founded on an instructional system called the Thayer Method, developed almost 200 years ago by an early superintendent of the academy named Sylvanus Thayer. The method provides very specific learning objectives for every course, puts the responsibility for meeting those objectives on the student, and incorporates quizzing and recitation in every class meeting. Students' grades at the academy rest on three pillars of training, academic, military, and physical. Mike Matthews, a professor of engineering psychology at the academy, says the load on students is enormous, greater than the hours available to them. In order to survive at the academy, West Point cadets must develop an ability to zero in on what's essential and let the rest fall by the wayside. This is about having very high expectations across multiple dimensions and keeping them real busy, Matthews says. In fact, as stunning as it sounds, Matthews will tell a student, quote, if you've read every word of this chapter, you're not being very efficient, unquote. The point is not to slide your eyes over the words. You start with questions and you read for answers. There's little or no lecturing in Matthews' courses. The class opens with a quiz on the learning objectives from the assigned reading. From there, on many days, students take to the boards. The classrooms have slate on all four walls, and a group of students are sent to each blackboard to collaborate on answering a question given by the professor. These are higher order questions that are given in the daily quiz, requiring the students to integrate ideas from the reading and apply them at a conceptual level. It's a form of retrieval practice, generation, and peer instruction. One student is selected from each group to give a recitation to the class explaining how the group has answered the question, and then the group's work is critiqued. All class meetings focus on constructs, not specific facts. And on the days the students do not take to the boards, they are engaged in other forms of exercise, demonstration, or group work aimed at understanding and articulating the larger concepts underlying the matter at hand. Clear learning objectives prior to each class, coupled with daily quizzing and active problem solving with feedback, keep students focused, awake, and working hard. One of the most important skills taught at West Point is something learned outside the classroom, how to shoot an azimuth. It's a skill used for keeping your bearings in unfamiliar territory. You climb a tree or a height of land and sight a distant landmark in the direction you're headed. Compass in hand, you note how many degrees your landmark lies off of due north. Then you descend into the bush and keep working your way in that direction. Periodically, you pause to shoot an azimuth and make sure you're on course. Quizzing is a way of shooting an azimuth in the classroom. Are you gaining the mastery you need to get to where you're trying to go? Matthews has had the privilege of seeing two of his students win Rhodes Scholarships. The most recent was Cadet Kylie Hunkler, now Second Lieutenant Hunkler. Hunkler will be spending the next two years at Oxford University and then matriculating at Johns Hopkins Medical School. It was Hunkler who spoke to us of shooting an azimuth, quote, everything at the Academy is about self-responsibility, taking ownership for finding your own way to the objective, she said. The medical college admissions test, for example, encompasses four major course blocks, reading, chemistry, physiology, and writing. For each of these blocks, Hunkler created the learning objectives in her head that she deemed most important and then set out to answer them as she studied, quote, I took a practice test every three days, saw what I got wrong, and adjusted, unquote. Shooting her azimuth, quote, a lot of students get hung up studying for months, trying to memorize everything, but for me, it was more about understanding the concepts. So my azimuth check would be, okay, what is this question asking? What's the broader theme here? And does that match up with what I've outlined for this section? One of this book's authors, Roediger, attended Riverside Military Academy in Gainesville, Georgia for high school. Riverside used a form of the Thayer method with students having daily quizzes, problem sets, or assignments to be completed in class. The range of ability of these younger cadets was much more varied than at the elite U.S. Military Academy at West Point, but the Thayer method worked well. In fact, such methods that include daily participation are especially likely to help students who are not prone to work hard on their own outside of class. The Thayer method is a strong encouragement for them to keep at it, and echoes what Mary Pat Wenderoth has found in her empirical studies.