such a criticism, in principle training is indispensable, but if so therapists should see their task in immunizing the trainee against nihilism rather than inoculating him with a cynicism that is a defense mechanism against their own nihilism. Logotherapists may even conform to some of the training and licensing requirements stipulated by the other schools of psychotherapy. In other words, one may howl with the wolves, if need be, but when doing so one should be I would urge a sheep in wolf's clothing. There is no need to become untrue to the basic concept of man and the principles of the philosophy of life inherent in logotherapy. Such a loyalty is not hard to maintain in view of the fact that, as Elizabeth S. Lucas once pointed out, throughout the history of psychotherapy there has never been a school as undogmatic as logotherapy. Footnote. Logotherapy is not imposed on those who are interested in psychotherapy. It is not comparable to an oriental bazaar but rather to a supermarket. In the former the customer is talked into buying something. In the latter he is shown and offered various things from which he may pick what he deems usable and valuable. And at the First World Congress of Logotherapy, San Diego, California, November 6-8, 1980, I argued not only for the rehumanization of psychotherapy but also for what I called the de-gurufication of logotherapy. My interest does not lie in raising parrots that just rehash their master's voice but rather in passing the torch to independent and inventive, innovative and creative spirits. Sigmund Freud once asserted, Let one attempt to expose a number of the most diverse people uniformly to hunger. With the increase of the imperative urge of hunger all individual differences will blur, and in their stead will appear the uniform expression of the one unstilled urge. Thank heaven Sigmund Freud was spared knowing the concentration camps from the inside. His subjects lay on a couch designed in the plush style of Victorian culture, not in the filth of Auschwitz. There the individual differences did not blur, but, on the contrary, people became more different. People unmasked themselves, both the swine and the saints. And today you need no longer hesitate to use the word saints. Think of Father Maximilian Kolbe, who was starved and finally murdered by an injection of carbolic acid at Auschwitz, and who in 1983 was canonized. You may be prone to blame me for invoking examples that are the exceptions to the rule. Said Omnia praeclara tam difficilia quam rara sunt, but everything great is just as difficult to realize as it is rare to find, reads the last sentence of the Ethics of Spinoza. You may, of course, ask whether we really need to refer to saints. Wouldn't it suffice just to refer to decent people? It is true that they form a minority. More than that, they always will remain a minority. And yet I see therein the very challenge to join the minority, for the world is in a bad state. But everything will become still worse unless each of us does his best. So let us be alert—alert in a twofold sense. Since Auschwitz, we know what man is capable of. And since Hiroshima, we know what is at stake. This concludes the reading of Man's Search for Meaning by Viktor E. Frankl. This book was read by Simon Vance. Copyright 1959, 1962, and 1984 by Viktor E. Frankl. This unabridged recording of the reading of Man's Search for Meaning was published by arrangement with Dr. Viktor Frankl and was produced in 1995 by Blackstone Audiobooks, which holds the copyright there too. Neither this recording nor any part of it may be reproduced or used for any purpose without prior written authorization from Blackstone Audiobooks. Audible hopes you have enjoyed this program.