rarely help him with a particularly recalcitrant grimoire. Now he realized what made boredom so attractive. It was the knowledge that worse things, dangerously exciting things, were going on just around the corner, and that you were well out of them. For boredom to be enjoyable there had to be something to compare it with, whereas this was just boredom on top of more boredom, winding in on itself until it became a great crushing sledgehammer which paralyzed all thought and experience, and pounded eternity into something like flannel. This is dreadful, he said. The chained man raised a haggard face. You're telling me, he said, I used to like pushing the ball up the hill. You could stop for a chat, you could see what was going on, you could try various holds and everything. It was a bit of a tourist attraction. People used to point me out. I wouldn't say it was fun, but it gave you a purpose in the afterlife. And I used to help him, said the demon, its voice raw with sullen indignation. Give you a bit of a hand sometimes, didn't I? Pass on a bit of gossip and that. Sort of encourage him when he'd roll back and that. I'd say things like, whoops, there goes the bleeder again, and he'd say, bugger it. We had some times, didn't we? Great times. It blew its nose. Rincewind coughed. It's getting too much, said the demon. We used to be happy in the old days. It wasn't as if it used to hurt anyone much, and, well, we was all in it together. That's it, said the chained man. You knew if you kept your nose clean you'd stand a chance of getting out one day. You know, once a week now I have to stop this for craft lessons. That must be nice, said Rincewind uncertainly. The man's eyes narrowed. Basket-work, he said. I've been here eighteen millennia, demon and imp, grumbled the demon. I learned my trade, I did. Eighteen thousand bloody years behind the pitchfork, and now this? Reading a— A sonic boom echoed the length of hell. Oi, oi, said the demon. He's back. He sounds angry, too. We'd better get our heads down. And indeed, all over the circles of Hades, demons and damned were groaning in unison and getting back to their private hells. The chained man broke into a sweat. Look, Vizimuth, he said, couldn't we just sort of miss out one or two paragraphs? It's my job, said the demon wretchedly. You know he checks up. It's more than my job's worth. He broke off, gave Rincewind a sad grimace, and patted the sobbing figure with a gentle talon. Tell you what, he said kindly, I'll skip some of the sub-clauses. Rincewind took Eric by an unresisting shoulder. We'd better get along, he said quietly. This is really horrible, said Eric, as they walked away. It gives Evil a bad name. Um, said Rincewind. He didn't like the sound of HIM being back, and HIM being angry. Whether something important enough to deserve capital letters was angry in the vicinity of Rincewind, it was usually angry with HIM. If you know such a lot about this place, he said, perhaps you can remember how to get out. Eric scratched his head. It helps if one of you is a girl, he said. According to Ephebian mythology, there's a girl who comes down here every winter. To keep warm. I think the story says she actually creates the winter, sort of. Of known women like that, said Rincewind, nodding wisely. Or it helps if you've got a lyre, I think. Ah! We could be on firmer ground here, said Rincewind. He thought for a bit, and then said, um, my dog—my dog has six legs. The kind you play, said Eric patiently. Oh! And—and—and—when you do leave, if you look back, I think pomegranates come into it somewhere, or—or—or—or you turn into a piece of wood. I never look back, said Rincewind firmly. One of the first rules of running away is never look back. There was a roar behind them. Especially when you hear loud noises, Rincewind went on. When it comes to cowardice, that's what sorts out the men from the sheep. You run straight away. He grabbed the skirts of his robe. And they ran and ran, until a familiar voice said, Oh! How dare—dear lads! Hop up! It's amazing how you meet old friends down here. And another voice said, Wosteyn! Wosteyn! Where are they? The sub-lords of Hell trembled. This was going to be dreadful. It might even result in a memo. They can't have escaped, rasped Astphagal. They're here somewhere. Why can you not find them? Am I surrounded by incompetents as well as fools? My lord, the demon princes turned. The speaker was Duke Vasanago, one of the oldest demons. How old, no one knew. But if he didn't actually invent original sin, at least he made one of the first copies. In terms of sheer enterprise and deviousness of mind, he might even have passed for human, and in fact generally took the form of an old, rather sad lawyer with an eagle somewhere in his ancestry. And every demonic mind thought, poor old Vasanago, he's done it this time, this won't be just a memo, this will be a policy statement, cc'd to all departments, and a copy for files. Astphagal turned slowly, as though mounted on a turntable. He was back in his preferred form now, but had pulled himself together, as it were, on a higher level of emotion. The mere thought of living humans in his domain made him twang with fury like a violin string. You couldn't trust them, they were unreliable. The last human allowed down here alive had given the place a terribly bad press. Above all, they made him feel inferior. Now the full wattage of his anger focused on the old demon. You had a point to make, he said. I was merely going to say, Lord, that we have made an extensive search of all eight circles, and I am really certain— Silence! Don't think I don't know what's going on, growled Astphagal, circling the drawn figure. I seen you, and you, and you, his trident pointed at some of the other old Lords, plotting in corners, encouraging rebellion. I rule here, is that not so? And I will be obeyed. Fascinago was pale, his patrician nostrils flared like jet intakes. Everything about him said, you pompous little creature, of course we encourage rebellion, we're demons, and I was maddening the minds of princes when you were encouraging cats to leave dead mice under the bed, you small-minded, paper-worshipping nincompoop. Everything about him said this, except for his voice, which said calmly, No one is denying this, sire. Then search again, and the demon who let them in is to be taken to the lowest pit and disassembled. Is that clear? Fascinago's eyebrows rose. Old Urgal, flogger sire, he was foolish, certainly, but he is a loyal—are you by any chance endeavouring to contradict me? Fascinago hesitated. Dreadful as he privately held the king to be, demons are strong believers in precedence and hierarchy. There were too many young demons pressing below them for the senior lords to openly demonstrate the ways of regicide and coup, no matter what the provocation. Fascinago had plans of his own, no sense in spoiling things now. No, sire, he said, but that will mean, sire, that the dread portal is no longer— Do it! The luggage arrived at the dread portal. There was no way to describe how angry you can get running nearly twice the length of the space-time continuum, and the luggage had been pretty annoyed to start with. It looked at the hinges, it looked at the locks, it backed away a bit and appeared to read the new sign over the portal. Possibly this made it angrier, although with the luggage there wasn't any reliable way of telling, because it spent all its time beyond, in a manner of speaking, the hostility event horizon. The doors of hell were ancient. It wasn't just time and heat that had baked their wood to something like black granite. They had picked up fear and dull evil. They were more than mere things to fill a hole in the wall. They were bright enough to be dimly aware of what their future was likely to hold. They watched the luggage shuffle back across the sand, flex its legs and crouch down. The lock clicked, and the bolts dragged themselves back hurriedly. The great bars jerked from their sockets, the doors flung themselves back against the wall. The luggage untensed, it straightened, it stepped forward, it almost strutted. It passed between the straining hinges and, when it was nearly through, turned and gave the nearest door a damn good kick. There was a great treadmill. It didn't power anything, and had particularly creaky bearings. It was one of Astvigal's more inspired ideas, and had no use whatsoever except to show several hundred people that if they had thought their lives had been pretty pointless, they hadn't seen anything yet. We can't stay here forever, said Rincewind. We need to do things, like eat. That's one of the tremendous advantages of being a damned soul, said Ponce de Cuerme. All the old bodily cares fade away. Of course you get a completely new set of cares, but I have always found it advisable to look for the silver dining. Worst daym! said the parrot, who was sitting on his shoulder. Fancy that, said Rincewind. I never knew animals could go to hell, although I can quite see why they made an exception in this case. Up yours, wizard! Why don't they look for us here? That's what I don't understand, said Eric. Shut up and keep walking, said Rincewind. They're stupid, that's why. They can't imagine that we would be doing something like this. Yes, they're right there. I can't imagine that we are doing something like this either, said Eric. Rincewind treadled for a bit, watching a crowd of frantically searching demons hurry past. So you didn't find the Fountain of Youth, then, he said, feeling that he should make some conversation? Oh, but I did, said de Quirme, earnestly. The Clear Spring, deep in the jungle, it was very impressive. I had a good long drink, too—or draught, which I think is the more appropriate word. And, said Rincewind, it definitely worked, yes. For a while there I could definitely feel myself getting younger. But Rincewind waved a vague hand to take in de Quirme, the treadmill, the towering circles of the pit. Ah, said the old man, of course, that's the really annoying bit. I'd read so much about the Fountain, and you'd have thought someone in all those books would have mentioned a really vital thing about the water, wouldn't you? Which was? Boil it first. Set it all, doesn't it? Terrible shame, really. The luggage trotted down the great spiral road that linked the circles of the pit. Even if conditions had been normal, it probably would not have attracted much attention. If anything, it was rather less astonishing than most of the denizens. This is really boring, said Eric. That's the point, said Rincewind. We shouldn't be lurking here. We should be trying to find a way out. Well, yes, but there isn't one. There is, in fact, said a voice behind Rincewind. It was the voice of someone who had seen it all, and hadn't liked any of it very much. Laviolus? said Rincewind. His ancestor was right behind him. You'll get home all right, said Laviolus bitterly. Your very words—heh!—ten years of one damn thing after another. You might have doled a chap. Eh, said Eric. We didn't want to upset the course of history. You didn't want to upset the course of history, said Laviolus slowly. He stared down at the woodwork of the treadmill. Oh, good. That makes it all all right. I feel a lot better for knowing that. Speaking as the course of history, I'd like to say thank you very much. Er, excuse me, said Rincewind. Yes? You said there's another way out? Oh, yes, a back way. Where is it? Laviolus stopped treadling for a moment, and pointed across the misty hollow. See that arch over there? Rincewind peered into the distance. Just about, he said. Is that it? Yes. A long, steep climb. Don't know where it comes out, though. How did you find out about it? Laviolus shrugged. I asked a demon, he said. There's always an easier way of doing everything, you know. It'd take forever to get there, said Eric. It's right on the other side. We'd never make it. Rincewind nodded, and glumly continued the endless walk. After a few minutes, he said, has it struck you we seem to be going faster? Eric turned around. The luggage had stepped aboard, and was trying to catch up with them. Astphagel stood in front of his mirror. Show me what they can see, he commanded. Yes, master. Astphagel inspected the whirring image for a moment. Tell me what this means, he said. I'm just a mirror, master. What do I know? Astphagel growled. And I'm the Lord of Hades, he said, gesturing with his trident, and I'm prepared to risk another seven years' bad luck. The mirror considered the available options. I might be able to hear some creaking, lord, it ventured. And? I smell smoke. No smoke, I specifically banned all open fires, a very old-fashioned concept. It gave the place a bad name. Nevertheless, master. Show me Hades. The mirror gave of its best. The king was just in time to see the treadwheel, its bearings glowing red-hot, crash down from its mountings and roll, as deceptively slowly as an avalanche, across the country of the damned. Rincewind hung from the push-bar, watching the rungs whir past at a speed that would have burned the soles of his sandals if he had been foolish enough to let his feet down. The dead, however, were taking it all with the cheerful aplomb of those who know that the worst has already happened to them. Cries of, Pass the candy-floss, drifted down. He heard Laviolus commending the wheel's splendid traction, and explaining to D'Aquereme how, if you have a vehicle which put down its road in front of it, just like the luggage was in fact doing, and then you covered it with armour, then wars would be less bloody, over in half the time, and everyone could spend even longer going home. The luggage made no comment at all. It could see its master hanging a few feet away, and just kept going. It may have occurred to it that the journey was taking some time, but that was time's problem. And so, flinging out the occasional screaming soul, bumping and gyrating and crushing the occasional luckless demon, the wheel bowled on. It smashed against the opposite cliff. Lord Vasanago smiled. Now, he said, it is time. The other senior demons looked a bit shifty. They were, of course, steeped in evil, and Astphagel was definitely not one of us, and the most revolting little oik ever to oil his way into the post. But, well, this—perhaps there were some things that were too— Learn from the ways of humans, mimicked Vasanago. He bade me learn from humans—me—the impudence, the arrogance. But I watched—oh, yes, I learned—I planned. The look on his face was unspeakable. Even the lords of the nethermost circles who gloried in villainy had to turn their heads. Duke Drazometh the Putrid raised a hesitant talon. But if he even suspects—he said—I mean, he has a foul temper on him—those memos—he shuddered. But what are we doing? Vasanago spread his hands in a gesture of innocence. Where is the harm in it? Brothers, I ask you, where is the harm? His fingers curled. The knuckles shone white under the thin blue-veined skin as he surveyed the doubting faces. Or would you rather receive another statement of policy? he said. Brothers twitched as the lords made up their minds like a row of dominoes falling over. There were some things on which even they were united. No more policy statements, no more consultative documents, no more morale-boosting messages to all staff. This was hell, but you had to draw the line somewhere. Earl Beaslemoth rubbed one of his three noses. And humans somewhere thought this up all by themselves, he said. We didn't give them any—you know—hints. Vasanago shook his head. All their own work, he said proudly, like a fond schoolmaster who has just seen a star-pupil graduate summa cum laude. The earl stared into infinity. I thought we were supposed to be the ghastly ones, he said, his voice filled with awe. The old lord nodded. He'd waited a long time for this. While others had talked of red-hot revolution, he'd just stared out into the world of men and watched and marveled. This Rincewind character had been extremely useful. He'd managed to keep the king totally occupied. He'd been worth all the effort. The damn fool human still thought it was his fingers doing the business. Three wishes indeed! And thus it was, when Rincewind pulled himself free of the wreckage of the wheel, he found Astvigl, king of demons, lord of hell, master of the pit, standing over him. Astvigl had passed through the earlier stage of fury, and was now in that calm lagoon of rage where the voice is steady, the manner is measured and polite, and only a faint trace of spittle at the corner of the mouth betrays the inner inferno. Eric crawled out from under a broken spar and looked up. How dear! he said. The demon king twirled the trident. Suddenly it didn't look comical any more. It looked like a black dragon. It was a black dragon! A black dragon! A black dragon! A black dragon! A black dragon! A black dragon! A black dragon!