This is Audible. Terry Pratchett has asked us to remind you of certain terms of the Audible license that you agreed to when you became a customer of Audible. Namely, Audible grants you a limited license to access the content solely for your personal and non-commercial use. You are not allowed to copy, reproduce, distribute, or use the content in any other manner. You cannot sell, transfer, lease, modify, distribute, or publicly perform the Audible content in any manner, nor can you exploit it commercially in any way. If Audible becomes aware that you have sold or attempted to sell Audible content in any form, your membership will be terminated immediately, and you will not be allowed to rejoin or purchase any Audible content. Thanks for your cooperation. Isis Audiobooks presents an unabridged recording of Eric, written by Terry Pratchett, read by Stephen Briggs. The bees of death are big and black. They buzz low and somber. They keep their honey in combs of wax as white as altar candles. The honey is black as night, thick as sin, and sweet as treacle. It is well known that eight colors make up white, but there are also eight colors of darkness for those that have the seeing of them, and the hives of death are among the black grass in the black orchard under the black-blossomed ancient boughs of trees that will eventually produce apples that, put it like this, probably won't be red. The grass was short now. The scythe that had done the work leaned against the gnarled bowl of a pear tree. Now death was inspecting his bees, gently lifting the combs in his skeletal fingers. A few bees buzzed around him. Like all beekeepers, death wore a veil. It wasn't that he had anything to sting, but sometimes a bee would get inside his skull and buzz around and give him a headache. As he held a comb up to the gray light of his little world between the realities, there was the faintest of tremors. A hum went up from the hive, a leaf floated down. A wisp of wind blew for a moment through the orchard, and that was the most uncanny thing, because the air in the land of death is always warm and still. Death fancied that he heard, very briefly, the sound of running feet, and a voice saying—no, a voice thinking, Oh shit, oh shit, oh shit, I'm going to die, I'm going to die, I'm going to die. Death is almost the oldest creature in the universe, with habits and modes of thought that mortal man cannot begin to understand. But because he was also a good beekeeper, he carefully replaced the comb in its rack and put the lid on the hive before reacting. He strode back through the dark garden to his cottage, removed the veil, carefully dislodged a few bees who had got lost in the depths of his cranium, and retired to his study. As he sat down at his desk, there was another rush of wind, which rattled the hourglasses on the shelves and made the big pendulum clock in the hall pause ever so briefly in its interminable task of slicing time into manageable bits. Death sighed and focused his gaze. There is nowhere death will not go, no matter how distant and dangerous. In fact, the more dangerous it is, the more likely he is to be there already. Now he stared through the mists of time and space. Oh, he said, it's him. It was a hot afternoon in late summer in Ankh-Morpork, normally the most thriving, bustling, and above all the most crowded city on the disk. Now the spears of the sun had achieved what innumerable invaders, several civil wars, and the curfew law had never achieved. It had pacified the place. Dogs lay panting in the scalding shade. The river Ankh, which never what you might call sparkled, oozed between its banks as if the heat had sucked all the spirit out of it. The streets were empty, oven-brick hot. No enemies had ever taken Ankh-Morpork. Well, technically they had quite often. The city welcomed free-spending barbarian invaders, but somehow the puzzled raiders always found, after a few days, that they didn't own their own horses any more, and within a couple of months they were just another minority group with its own graffiti and food shops. But the heat had besieged the city and triumphed over the walls. It lay over the trembling streets like a shroud. Under the blow-lamp of the sun, assassins were too tired to kill. It turned thieves honest. In the ivy-covered fastness of Unseen University, premier college of wizardry, the inmates dozed with their pointy hats over their faces. Even blue-bottles were too exhausted to bang against window-panes. The city siested, awaiting the sunset and the brief, hot, velvet surcease of the night. Only the librarian was cool. He was also swinging and hanging out. This was because he'd rigged up a few ropes and rings in one of the sub-basements of the Unseen University library, the one where they kept the, um, erotic books. Just erotic, nothing kinky. It's the difference between using a feather and using a chicken. In vats of crushed ice. And he was dreamily dangling in the chilly vapour above them. All books of magic have a life of their own. Some of the really energetic ones can't simply be chained to the bookshelves. They have to be nailed shut or kept between steel plates. Or, in the case of the volumes on tantric sex-magic for the serious connoisseur, kept under very cold water to stop them bursting into flames and scorching their severely plain covers. The librarian swung gently back and forth above the seething vats, dozing peacefully. Then the footsteps came out of nowhere, raced across the floor with a noise that scraped the raw surface of the soul, and disappeared through the wall. There was a faint, distant scream that sounded like, Oh gods, oh gods, oh gods, this is it, I'm gonna die. The librarian woke up, lost his grip, and flopped into the few inches of tepid water that was all that stood between the joy of tantric sex with illustrations for the advanced student by a lady and spontaneous combustion. And it would have gone badly for him if the librarian had been a human being. Fortunately, he was currently an orangutan. With so much raw magic sloshing around in the library, it would be surprising if accidents did not happen sometimes, and one particularly impressive one had turned him into an ape. Not many people get the chance to leave the human race while still alive, and he'd strenuously resisted all effort since to turn him back. Since he was the only librarian in the universe who could pick up books with his feet, the university hadn't pressed the point. It also meant that his idea of desirable female companionship now looked something like a sack of butter thrown through a roll of old inner tubes, and so he was lucky to get away with only mild burns, a headache, and some rather ambivalent feelings about cucumbers, which wore off by tea-time. In the library above, the grimoire creaked and rustled their pages in astonishment as the invisible runner passed straight through the bookshelves and disappeared, or rather disappeared even more. Ankh-Morpork gradually awoke from its slumber. Something invisible and yelling at the top of its voice was passing through every part of the city, dragging in its wake a trail of destruction. Wherever it went, things changed. A fortune-teller, in the street of cunning artificers, heard the footsteps run across her bedroom floor, and found her crystal ball had turned into a little glass sphere with a cottage in it, plus snowflakes. In a quiet corner of the mended drum tavern, where the adventuresses Herena the Henna-Haired Haridan, Red Charon, and Diomay Witch of the Night were meeting for some girl-talk and a game of canasta, all the drinks turned into small yellow elephants. "'Send wizards up at the University,' said the barman, hastily replacing the glasses. "'It oughtn't to be allowed!' Midnight dropped off the clock. The Council of Wizardry rubbed their eyes and stared blearily at one another. They felt it oughtn't to be allowed, too, especially since they weren't the ones that were allowing it. Finally, the new Arch-Chancellor, Ezrolith Churn, suppressed a yawn, sat up straight in his chair, and tried to look suitably magisterial. He knew he wasn't really Arch-Chancellor material. He hadn't really wanted the job. He was ninety-eight, and had achieved this worthwhile age by carefully not being any trouble or threats to anyone. He had hoped to spend his twilight years completing his seven-volume treatise on some little-known aspects of Kooian rain-making rituals, which were an ideal subject for academic study, in his opinion, since the rituals only ever worked in Koo, and that particular continent had slipped into the ocean several thousand years ago. It took thirty years to subside. The inhabitants spent a lot of the time wading. It went down in history as the multiverse's most embarrassing continental catastrophe. The trouble was that in recent years the lifespan of Arch-Chancellors seemed to be a bit on the short side, and the natural ambition of all wizards for the job had given way to a curious self-effacing politeness. He'd come down one morning to find everyone calling him Sir. It had taken him days to find out why. His head ached. He felt it was several weeks past his bedtime, but he had to say something. "'Gentlemen,' he began. "'Ook!' "'Sorry, and—' "'Ook! "'I mean—' "'Apes, of course. "'Ook!' The Arch-Chancellor opened and shut his mouth in silence for a while, trying to reroute his train of thought. The librarian was Ex Officio, a member of the College Council. No one had been able to find any rule about orangutans being barred, although they had surreptitiously looked very hard for one. "'It's a haunting,' he ventured. 'Some sort of a ghost, maybe. A bell-book-and-candle job.' The bursar sighed. "'We tried that, Arch-Chancellor.' The Arch-Chancellor leaned towards him. "'Eh?' he said. "'I said we tried that, Arch-Chancellor,' said the bursar loudly, directing his voice at the old man's ear. "'After dinner, you remember? We used Hump-Temper's names of the ants and rang Old Tom.' Old Tom was the single cracked bronze bell in the University bell-tower. The clapper dropped out shortly after it was cast, but the bell still told out some tremendously sonorous silences every hour. "'Did we, indeed. The work, did it?' "'No, Arch-Chancellor.' "'Eh?' "'Anyway, we've never had any trouble with ghosts before,' said the senior tutor. "'Wizards just don't haunt places.' The Arch-Chancellor groped for a crumb of comfort. "'Perhaps it's just something natural,' he said. "'Possibly the rumblings of an underground spring. Earth-movements, perhaps. Something in the drains. They can make very funny noises, you know, when the wind is in the right direction.' He sat back and beamed. The rest of the council exchanged glances. "'The drains don't sound like hurrying feet, Arch-Chancellor,' said the bursar wearily. "'Unless someone left a tap running,' said the senior tutor. The bursar scowled at him. He'd been in the tub when the invisible screaming thing had hurtled through his room. It was not an experience he wanted to repeat. The Arch-Chancellor nodded at him. "'Let's settle, then,' he said, and fell asleep. The bursar watched him in silence. Then he pulled the old man's hat off and tucked it gently under his head. "'Well,' he said wearily, "'has anyone got any suggestions?' The librarian put his hand up. "'Hook,' he said. "'Yes, well done. Good boy,' said the bursar breezily. "'Anyone else?' The orangutan glared at him as the other wizards shook their heads. "'It's a tremor in the texture of reality,' said the senior tutor. "'That's what it is.' "'What shall we do about it, then?' "'Search me, unless we tried the old—' "'Oh, no,' said the bursar. "'Don't say it. Please, it's far too dangerous.' His words were chopped off by a scream that began at the far end of the room and doppled along the table, accompanied by the sound of many running feet, the wizards' duct and a scatter of overturned chairs. The candle-flames were drawn into the long, thin tongues of octarine light before being snuffed out. Then there was silence—the special kind that you get after a really unpleasant noise. And the bursar said, "'All right. I give in. We will try the rite of Ashk-ente.' It is the most serious ritual eight wizards can undertake. It summons Death, who naturally knows everything that is going on everywhere. And, of course, it's done with reluctance, because senior wizards are generally very old and would prefer not to do anything to draw Death's attention in their direction. It took place at midnight, in the University's Great Hall, in a welter of incense, candlesticks, runic inscriptions and magic circles, but none of which was strictly necessary but which made the wizards feel better. Magic flared, the chants were chanted, the invocations were truly invoked. The wizards stared into the magic octogram, which remained empty. After a while, the circle of robed figures began to mutter amongst themselves, "'We must have done something wrong. Look! Maybe he's out. Or busy. Do you think we should give up and go back to bed?' "'Who are we waiting for, exactly?' The bursar turned slowly to the figure beside him. You could always tell a wizard's robe. It was bedecked with sequins, sigils, fur and lace, and there was usually a considerable amount of wizard inside it. This robe, however, was very black. The material looked as though it had been chosen for its hard-wearing qualities. So did its owner. He looked as though, if he wrote a diet book, it would be a best-seller. Death was watching the octogram with an expression of polite interest. "'Er,' said the bursar, "'the fact is, in fact, that, er, you should be on the inside.' "'I'm so sorry.' Death stalked in a dignified way into the centre of the room and watched the bursar expectantly. "'I hope we are not going to have any of this foul fiend business again,' he said. "'I trust we're not interrupting any important enterprise?' said the bursar politely. "'All my work is important,' said Death. "'Naturally,' said the bursar. "'To somebody.' "'Er, er, er, the reason, oh fow—er, sir, that we have called you here is for the reason—' "'It is Rincewind.' "'What?' "'The reason you summoned me. The answer is, it is Rincewind.' "'But we haven't asked you the question yet.' "'Nevertheless, the answer is, it is Rincewind.' "'Look, what we want to know is, what's causing this outbreak of—' "'Oh!' Death pointedly picked invisible particles off the edge of his scythe. The arch-chancellor cupped a gnarled hand over his ear. "'What did he say? Who's the fellow with the stick?' "'It's Death, arch-chancellor,' said the bursar patiently. "'Eh?' "'It's Death, sir, you know.' "'Tell him we don't want any,' said the old wizard, waving his stick. The bursar sighed. "'We summoned him, arch-chancellor.' "'Is it? What are we going to do that for? Bloody silly thing to do!' The bursar gave Death an embarrassed grin. He was on the point of asking him to excuse the arch-chancellor on account of his age, but realised that this would in the circumstances be a complete waste of breath. "'Are we talking about the wizard Rincewind? The one with the—' The bursar gave a shudder. "'Horrible luggage on legs. But he got blown up when there was all that business with the sorcerer, didn't he?' The bursar was referring obliquely to the difficult occasion when the University very nearly caused the end of the world, and would in fact have done so had it not been for a chain of events involving Rincewind, a magic carpet, and a half-brick in a sock. See sorcery!' The whole affair was very embarrassing to wizards, as it always is to people who find out afterwards that they were on the wrong side all along, i.e. the one that lost. And it was remarkable how many of the University's senior staff were now adamant that at the time they'd been off sick, visiting their aunt, or doing research with the door locked while humming loudly, and had had no idea what was going on outside. There had been some desultory talk about putting up a statue to Rincewind, but by the curious alchemy that tends to apply in these sensitive issues, this quickly became a plaque, then a note in the roll of honour, and finally a motion of censure for being improperly dressed. "'Into the dungeon dimensions. And now he is trying to get back home. Can he do that? There would need to be an unusual conjunction of circumstances. Reality would need to be weakened in certain unexpected ways.' "'That isn't likely to happen, is it?' said the bursar anxiously. People who have it on record that they were visiting their aunt for two months are always nervous about people turning up who may have mistakenly thought that they weren't, and, owing to some trick of the light, might have believed that they had seen them doing things that they couldn't have been doing, owing to being at their aunt's. "'It would be a million-to-one chance,' said Death. "'Exactly. A million-to-one chance.' "'Oh!' said the bursar, intensely relieved. "'Oh dear! What a shame!' He brightened up considerably. "'Of course. There's all the noise, but, unfortunately, I expect he won't survive for long.' "'This could be the case,' said Death blandly. "'I am sure, though, that you would not wish me to make a practice "'of issuing definitive statements in this field?' "'No, no, of course not,' said the bursar, hurriedly. "'Right. Well, many thanks. Poor chap. What a great pity. "'Still, can't be helped. Perhaps we should be philosophical about these things.' "'Perhaps you should.' "'And we had better not keep you,' the bursar added politely. "'Thank you.' "'Good-bye.' "'Be seeing you.' "'In fact, the noise stopped just before breakfast. "'The librarian was the only one unhappy about it. "'Rinswind had been his assistant and his friend, "'and was a good man when it came to peeling a banana. "'He had also been uniquely good at running away from things. "'He was not,' the librarian considered, "'a type to be easily caught. "'There had probably been an unusual conjunction of circumstances. "'That was a far more likely explanation.' "'There had been an unusual conjunction of circumstances. "'By exactly a million-to-one chance, "'there had been someone watching, studying, "'looking for the right tools for a special job. "'And here was Rinswind.'