"'I bet it's more oblong, and sort of smaller,' said Rincewind, his face a picture of innocent inquiry. "'You bet. Pretty unimaginative bastards, aren't you?' "'I see.' Rincewind folded his hands on his lap. "'Try to escape,' said the guard. "'Go on, just try it. You try it, and see what happens.' "'I expect your colleagues will be bringing it into the city,' Rincewind went on. "'They might do,' the guard conceded. It had begun to dawn on the guard that there was a lot of shouting going on in the distance. Someone had tried to blow a bugle, but the notes gurgled into silence after a few bars. "'Bit of a fight going on out there, by the sound of it,' said Rincewind. "'People winning their spurs, doing heroic deeds of valour, being noticed by superior officers, that sort of thing, and here's you hanging around in here with us.' "'I've got to stick by me post,' said the guard. "'Exactly the right attitude,' said Rincewind. "'Never mind about everyone else out there fighting valiantly to defend their city and womenfolk against the foe. You stop it here and guard us. That's the spirit. They'll probably put up a statue to you in City Square if there's one left. He did his duty, they'll write on it.' The soldier appeared to think about this, and while he was doing so there was a terrible splintering creak from the direction of the main gates. "'Look,' he said desperately, 'if I just pop out for a minute—' "'Don't you worry about us,' said Rincewind, encouragingly. "'It's not even as if we're armed.' "'Right,' said the soldier. ''Thanks.' He gave Rincewind a worried smile and hurried off in the direction of the noise. Eric looked at Rincewind with something like admiration. "'That was actually quite amazing,' he said. "'Going to go a long way, that lad,' said Rincewind, a sound military thinker if ever I saw one. Come on, let's run away.' "'Where to?' Rincewind sighed. He tried to make his basic philosophy clear time and again, and people never got the message. "'Don't you worry about too,' he said. 'In my experience that always takes care of itself. The important word is away.' The captain raised his head cautiously over the barricade and snarled. "'It's just a little box, sergeant,' he snapped. 'It's not even as if it could hold one or two men.' "'Big pardon, sir,' said the sergeant, and his face was the face of a man whose world has changed a lot in a few short minutes. "'It holds at least four, sir. Corporal Disuse and his squad, sir. I sent them out to open it, sir.' "'Are you drunk, sergeant?' "'Not yet, sir,' said the sergeant, with feeling. "'Little boxes don't eat people, sergeant.' "'After that it got angry, sir. You can see what it did to the gates.' The captain peered over the broken timbers again. "'I suppose it grew legs and walked over there, did it?' he said sarcastically. The sergeant broke into a relieved grin. At last they seemed to be on the same wavelength. "'Got it in one, sir,' he said. "'Legs—underage of the little bleeders, sir.' The captain glared at him. The sergeant put on the poker face which has been handed down from NCO to NCO ever since one proto-amphibian told another lower-ranking proto-amphibian to muster a squad of newts and take that beach. The captain was eighteen and fresh from the academy, where he had passed with flying colours in such subjects as classical tactics, valedictory odes, and military grammar. The sergeant was fifty-five, and instead of an education he had spent about forty years attacking or being attacked by harpies, humans, cyclopses, furies, and horrible things on legs. He felt put upon. "'Well, I'm going to have a look at it, sergeant.' "'Not a good plan, sir, if I may. And after I've had a look at it, sergeant, there is going to be trouble.' The sergeant threw him a salute. "'Right you are, sir,' he predicted. The captain snorted and climbed over the barricade towards the box, which sat silent and unmoving in its circle of devastation. The sergeant, meanwhile, slid into a sitting position behind the stoutest timber he could find, and with great determination pulled his helmet down hard over his ears. Rincewind crept through the streets of the city, with Eric tagging along behind. "'Are we going to find Elinor?' the boy said. "'No,' said Rincewind firmly. "'What we're going to do is we're going to find another way out, and we're going to go out through it.' "'That's not fair.' "'She's thousands of years older than you. I mean, attraction of the mature woman, all right, but it would never work out.' "'I demand that you take me to her,' wailed Eric. "'Avant!'' Rincewind stopped so sharply that Eric walked into him. "'Listen,' he said. "'We're in the middle of the most famously fatuous war there has ever been. Any minute now thousands of warriors will be locked in mortal combat, and you want me to go and find this overrated female and say, "'My friend wants to know if you'll go out with him.' Well, I won't.' Rincewind stalked up to another gateway in the city wall. It was smaller than the main one, and didn't have any guards, and had a wicket gate in it. Rincewind slid back the bolts. "'This isn't anything to do with us,' he said. "'We haven't even been born yet. We're not old enough to fight. It isn't our business, and we're not going to do anything more to upset the course of history. All right.' He opened the door, which saved the entire Ephebian army a bit of effort. They were just about to knock. All day long the noise of battle raged. This was chronicled by later historians, who went on at length about beautiful women being kidnapped, fleets being assembled, wooden animals being constructed, heroes fighting one another, and completely failed to mention the part played by Rincewind, Eric, and the luggage. The Ephebians did notice, however, how enthusiastically the Tessortian soldiery ran towards them, not so much keen to get into battle as very anxious to get away from something else. The historians also failed to note another interesting fact about ancient Clachian warfare, which was that it was still at that stage quite primitive, and just between soldiers, and hadn't yet been thrown open to the general public. Basically, everyone knew that one side or the other would win, a few unlucky generals would get their heads chopped off, large sums of money would be paid in tribute to the winners, everyone would go home for the harvest, and that bloody woman would have to make her mind up whose side she was on. So Tessortian street life went on more or less as normal, with the citizens stepping around the occasional knots of fighting men, or trying to sell them kebabs. Several of the more enterprising ones began dismantling the wooden horse for souvenirs. Rincewind didn't attempt to understand it. He sat down at a street café, and watched a spirited battle take place between market stalls, so that, amid the cries of, The hard part was watching the soldiers apologise when they bumped into customers. The even harder part was getting the café owner to accept a coin bearing the head of someone whose great-great-great-great-grandfather wasn't born yet. Fortunately, Rincewind was able to persuade the man that the future was another country. He was also able to convince the man that the future was another country. Fortunately, Rincewind was able to persuade the man that the future was another country. Oh, and a lemonade for the boy, he added. My parents let me drink wine, said Eric. I'm allowed one glass. I'll bet you are, said Rincewind. The owner industriously swabbed the tabletop, spreading its coating of dregs and spilt retsina into a thin varnish. Up for the fight, are you? he said. In a manner of speaking, said Rincewind guardedly. I shouldn't wander around too much, said the owner. They do say a civilian let the Ephebians in. Not that I've got anything against Ephebians. A fine body of men, he added hurriedly, as a knot of soldiery jogged past. A stranger, they say. That's cheating, using civilians. There's people out looking for him, so they can explain. He made a chopping motion with his hand. Rincewind stared at the hand as though hypnotised. Eric opened his mouth. Eric screeched and clutched at his shins. Have they got a description? Rincewind said. Don't think so. Well, best of luck to them, said Rincewind rather more cheerfully. What's up with the lad? Cramp. When the man had gone back behind his counter, Eric hissed, You didn't have to go and kick me. You're quite right. It was an entirely voluntary act on my part. A heavy hand dropped onto Rincewind's shoulder. He looked around and up into the face of an Ephebian centurion. A soldier beside him said. That's the one, Sarge. I'll bet a year's salt. Who'd have thought it, said the sergeant. He gave Rincewind an evil grin. Up we come, chummy. The chief would like a word with you. Some talk of Alexander and some of Hercules, of Hector and Lysander, and such great names as these. In fact, throughout the history of the multiverse, people have said nice things about every cauliflower-eared sword-swinger, at least in their vicinity, on the basis that it is a lot safer that way. It's funny how the people have always respected the kind of commander who comes up with strategies like, I want 50,000 of you chappies to rush at the enemy. Whereas the more thoughtful commanders who say things like, Why don't we build a damn great wooden horse and then nip in at the back gate while they're all round the thing waiting for us to come out, are considered only one step above commonoics, and not the kind of person you'd lend money to. This is because most of the first type of commander are brave men, whereas cowards make far better strategists. Rincewind was dragged before the Athenian leaders, who had set up a command post in the city's main square so that they could oversee the storming of the central citadel, which loomed over the city on its vertiginous hill. They were not too close, however, because the defenders were dropping rocks. They were discussing strategy when Rincewind arrived. The consensus seemed to be that if really large numbers of men were sent to storm the mountain, then enough might survive the rocks to take the citadel. This is essentially the basis of all military thinking. Several of the more impressively dressed chieftains glanced up when Rincewind and Eric approached, gave them a look which suggested that maggots were more interesting, and turned away again. The only person who seemed pleased to see them didn't look like a soldier at all. He had the armour, which was tarnished, and he had the helmet, which looked as though its plume had been used as a paintbrush, but he was skinny and had all the military bearing of a weasel. There was something vaguely familiar about his face, though. Rincewind thought it looked quite handsome. Pleased to see them was only a comparative description. He was the only one who acknowledged their existence. He was lounging in a chair and feeding the luggage with sandwiches. Oh, hello, he said gloomily. It's you. It was amazing how much information can be crammed into a couple of words. To achieve the same effect the man could have said, it's been a long night, I'm having to organise everything from wooden horse building to the laundry rotor, these idiots are about as much help as a rubber hammer, I never wanted to be here anyway, and, on top of all this, there's you. Hello, you. He indicated the luggage, which opened its lid expectantly. This yours, he said. Sort of, said Rincewind guardedly. I can't afford to pay for anything it's done, mind you. Funny little thing, isn't it, said the soldier. We found it herding fifty tzortians into a corner. Why was it doing that, do you think? Rincewind thought quickly. It has this amazing ability to know when people are thinking about harming me, he said. He glared at the luggage as one might glare at a sly, evil-tempered and generally reprehensible family pet, who, after years of biting visitors, has rolled over on its scabby back and played at lovable puppy to impress the bailiffs. Yes, said the man without much surprise. Magic, is it? Er, yes. Something in the wood, is it? Yes. Good job we didn't build a sodding horse out of it, then. Yes. Got into it by magic, did you? Got into it by magic, did you? Yes. Thought so. He threw another sandwich at the luggage. Where are you from? Rincewind decided to come clean. The future, he said. This didn't have the expected effect, the man just nodded. Oh, he said. And then he said, did we win? Yes. Oh. I suppose you can't remember the results of any horse races, said the man without much hope. No. I thought you probably wouldn't. Why did you open the gate for us? It occurred to Rincewind that saying it was because he had always been a firm admirer of the Ephebian political position would not, strangely enough, be the right thing to do. He decided to try the truth again. It was a novel approach, and worth experimenting with. I was looking for a way out, he said. To run away? Yes. Good man. Only sensible thing in the circumstances. He noticed Eric, who was staring at the other captains, clustered around their table and deep in argument. You, lad, he said. Want to be a soldier when you grow up? No, sir. The man brightened a bit. That's the stuff, he said. I want to be a eunuch, sir, Eric added. Rincewind's head turned as though it was being dragged. Why, he said, and then came up with the obvious answer at the same time as Eric. Because you get to work in a harem all day long, they chorused slowly. The captain coughed. You're not this boy's teacher, are you? he said. No. Do you think anyone has explained to him? No. Perhaps it would be a good idea if I got one of the centurions to have a word. You'd be amazed at the grasp of language those chaps have got. Do him the power of good, I expect, said Rincewind. The soldier picked up his helmet, sighed, nodded at the sergeant, and smoothed out the creases in his cloak. It was a grubby cloak. I think I'm expected to tell you off for something, he said. What for? Spoiling the war, apparently. Spoiling the war? The soldier sighed. Come on, let's go for a stroll. Sergeant, you and a couple of lads, please. A stone whistled down from the fort high above them and shattered. They can hold out for bloody weeks up there, said the soldier gloomily, as they walked away with the luggage padding patiently behind them. I'm Laviolus, who are you? He's my daemon, said Eric. Laviolus raised an eyebrow, the closest he ever came to expressing surprise at anything. Is he? I suppose it takes all sorts. Any good at getting in places, is he? He's more the getting-out kind, said Eric. Right, said Laviolus. He stopped besides a building and walked up and down a bit with his hands in his pockets, tapping on the flagstones with the toe of his sandal. Just here, I think, Sergeant, he said after a while. Right you are, sir. Look at that lot, will you, said Laviolus, while the sergeant and his men started to lever up the stones. That bunch around the table. Brave lads, I'll grant you, but look at them. Too busy posing for triumphant statues and making sure the historians spell the names right. Bloody years we've been laying siege to this place. More military, they said. You know, they actually enjoy it. I mean, when all's said and done, who cares? Let's just get it over with and go home, that's what I say. Found it, sir, said the sergeant. Right. Laviolus didn't look round. Okay, he rubbed his hands together. Let's sort this out and then we can get an early night. Would you care to accompany me? Your pet might be useful. What are we going to do? said Rincewind, suspiciously. We're just going to meet some people. Is it dangerous? A stone smashed through the roof of the building nearby. No, not really, said Laviolus. Compared to staying out here, I mean. And if the rest of them tried to storm the place, you know, in a proper military way. The hole led into a tunnel. The tunnel, after winding a bit, led to stairs. Laviolus mooched along it, occasionally kicking bits of fallen masonry as if he had a personal grudge against them. Err, said Rincewind, where does this lead? Oh, it's just a secret passageway to the centre of the citadel. You know, I thought it would be something like that, said Rincewind. I've got an instinct for it, you know, and I expect all the really top sortians will be up there, will they? I hope so, said Laviolus, stretching up the steps. With lots of guards? Dozens, I imagine. Highly trained, too? Laviolus nodded. The best. And this is where we're going, said Rincewind, determined to explore the full horror of the plan as one probes the sight of a rotting tooth? That's right. All six of us. And your box, of course. Oh, yes, said Rincewind, making a face in the darkness. The sergeant tapped him gently on the shoulder and leaned forward. Don't you worry about the captain, sir, he said. He's got the finest military brain on the continent. How do you know? Has anyone ever seen it, said Rincewind? You see, sir, what it is. He likes to get it over with without anyone getting hurt, sir, especially him. That's why he dreams up things like the horse, sir, and bribing people and that. We got into civvies last night and came in and got drunk in a pub with one of the palace cleaners, see, and found out about this tunnel. Yes, but secret passages, said Rincewind. There'll be guards and everything at the other end. No, sir, they use it to store the cleaning things, sir. There was a clang in the darkness ahead of them. Laviolus had tripped over a mop. Sergeant, sir, just open the door, will you? Eric was tugging at Rincewind's robe. What? said Rincewind testily. You know who Laviolus is, don't you? whispered Eric. Well, he's Laviolus. Get away. Don't you know the classics? That isn't one of those horse races we're supposed to remember, is it? Eric rolled his eyes. Laviolus was responsible for the fall of the sort, on account of being so cunning, he said, and then afterwards it took him ten years to get home, and he had all sorts of adventures with temptresses and sirens and sensual witches. Well, I can see why you've been studying him. Ten years, eh? Where did he live? About two hundred miles away, said Eric earnestly. Kept getting lost, did he? And when he got home he fought his wife's suitors and everything, and his dear old dog recognized him and died. Oh dear! It was the carrying his slippers in his mouth for fifteen years that killed it off. Shame! And you know what, Demon? All this hasn't happened yet. We could save him all that trouble. Rincewind thought about this. We could tell him to get a better navigator for a start, he said. There was a creek. The soldiers had got the door open. Everyone fall in, or whatever the bloody stupid command is, said Laviolus. The magic box to the front, please. No killing anyone unless it's really necessary. Try not to damage things. Right. Forward. The door led to a column-lined corridor. There was a distant murmur of voices. The troop crept towards the sound until it reached a heavy curtain. Laviolus took a deep breath, pushed it aside, and stepped forward and launched into a prepared speech. Now, I want to make myself absolutely clear, he said. I don't want there to be any unpleasantness of any kind, or any shouting for guards and so forth, or indeed any shouting at all. We will just take the young lady and go on, which is where anyone of any sense ought to be. Otherwise, I shall really have to put everyone to the sword, and I hate having to do things like that. The audience to the