gauze wings glued to its back. "'Happen to know the Trolls don't have any tradition of a Tooth Fairy,' Colin was saying, especially not one called,' he looked down, "'Tlinkerbell. So how about if we just call it breaking and entering without a Thieves' Guild licence?' "'It's racial prejudice not letting Trolls have a Tooth Fairy,' Tlinkerbell muttered. One of the Troll guards upended a sack on the desk. Various items of silverware cascaded over the paperwork. "'And this is what you found under their pillows, was it?' said Colin. "'Bless their little hearts,' said Tlinkerbell. At the next desk a tired dwarf was arguing with a vampire. "'Look,' he said, 'it's not murder. You're dead already, right?' "'He stuck them right in me.' "'Well, I've been down to interview the manager, and he said it was an accident. He said he's got nothing against vampires at all. He said it was merely carrying three boxes of H.B. eraser tips and tripped over the edge of your cloak.' "'I don't see why I can't work where I like.' "'Yes, but in a pencil factory?' Detritus looked down at Littlebottom and grinned. "'Welcome to Leyvin, the big city, Littlebottom,' he said. "'That's an interesting name.' "'Eh, is it?' "'Dwarves have names like Rock-Heaver or Strong-in-the-Arm.' "'Oh, do they?' Detritus was not one for the fine detail of relationships, but the edge in Littlebottom's voice got through to him. "'It's a good name, though,' he said. "'Eh, what's Slab?' said Cherry. "'It's your chloric ammonium and radium mixed up. It give your head a tingle, but melts trawl brains. Big problem in the mountains, and some buggers are making it here in the city, and we're trying to find out how it gets up there. Mr. Vimes is letting me run a—' Detritus concentrated. "'A public awareness campaign, telling people what happens to buggers who sells it to kids.' He waved a hand at a large and rather crudely done poster on the wall. Detritus said, "'Slab, just say—' "'Aaargh! Please! No! Aaargh!' He pushed open a door. "'This is the old privy, what we don't use no more. You can use it for mixing up stuff. It's the only place we got now. You have to clean it up first, cos it smells like a toilet in here.' He opened another door. "'And this is the locker room,' he said. "'You got your own peg and that, and there's these panels for getting changed behind, cos we knows you dwarves is modest. The good life if you don't weaken.' Mr. Vimes is okay, but he's a bit weird about some stuff. He keeping on saying stuff like, "'This city is a melting pot, and all the scum floats to the top,' and stuff like that. "'I'll give you your helmet and badge in a minute, but first—' He opened a rather larger locker on the other side of the room, which had Detritus painted on it. "'I got to go and hide this hammer.' Two figures hurried out of Ironcrust's Dwarf Bakery, to bread we to edge, threw themselves onto the cart, and shouted at the driver to leave urgently. He turned a pale face towards them and pointed to the road ahead. There was a wolf there. Not a usual kind of wolf. It had a blonde coat, which around its ears was almost long enough to be a mane, and wolves did not normally sit calmly on their haunches in the middle of a street. This one was growling—a long, low growl. It was the audible equivalent of a shortening fuse. The horse was transfixed—too frightened to stay where it was, but far too terrified to move. One of the men carefully reached for a crossbow. The growl rose slightly. He even more carefully took his hand away. The growl subsided again. "'What is it? It's a wolf. In a city? What does it find to eat? Oh, why did you have to ask that?' "'Good-morning, gentlemen,' said Carrot, as he stopped leaning against the wall. "'Looks like the fog's rising again. Thieves' Guild's licenses, please.' They turned. Carrot gave them a happy smile and nodded encouragingly. One of the men patted his coat in a theatrical display of absent-mindedness. "'Oh! Ah! Oh! Ah! Well! Ah! Ooh! Ah! Left the house in a bit of a hurry this morning. Ah! Must have forgotten.' "'Section 2, Rule 1 of the Thieves' Guild charter says that members must carry their cards on all professional occasions,' said Carrot. "'He's not even drawn his sword,' hissed the most stupid of the three-strong gang. "'He doesn't need to. He's got a loaded wolf.' Someone was writing in the gloom, the scritching of their pen the only sound, until a door creaked open. The writer turned, quick as a bird. "'You! I told you never to come back here!' "'I know. I know. But it's that damned thing! The production line's stopped, and it's got out, and it's killed the priest!' "'Did anyone see it?' "'In the fog we had last night. I shouldn't think so. But—' "'Then it is not. Ha! Ha! Ha! Ha! A matter of significance.' "'No. They're not supposed to kill people. Well, that is,' the speaker conceded, 'not by smashing them on the head, anyway.' "'They will, if so instructed.' "'I never told it to—anyway, what if it turns on me?' "'On its master? It can't disobey the words in its head, man.' The visitor sat down, shaking his head. "'Yeah. But—but which words? Ha! I don't know. I don't know. This is getting too much. That damned thing around all the time—' "'Making you a fat profit. All right, all right. But this other stuff—the poison—I never—' "'Shut up! I'll see you again to-night. You can tell the others that I certainly do have a candidate. And if you dare come here again—' The Ankh-Morpork Royal College of Heralds turned out to be a green gate in a wall in Mollymauk Street. Vimes tugged on the bell-pull. Something clanged on the other side of the wall, and immediately the place erupted in a cacophony of hoots, growls, whistles, and trumpetings. A voice shouted, "'Down, boy! Couchon!' I said, "'Er—Couchon! No, not Rempon! And thee shall have a sugar-lump like a good boy. I'll stop that at once. Put him down! Mildred, let go of Graham!' The animal noises subsided a bit, and footsteps approached. A wicket-gate in the main door opened a fraction. Vimes saw an inch-wide segment of a very short man. "'Yes? Are you the meat-man?' "'Commander Vimes,' said Vimes. "'I have an appointment.' The animal noises started up again. "'Eh? Commander Vimes!' Vimes shouted. "'Oh! I suppose thee'd better come in!' The door swung open. Vimes stepped through. Silence fell. Several dozen pairs of eyes regarded Vimes with acute suspicion. Some of the eyes were small and red. Several were big and poked just above the surface of the scummy pond that occupied a lot of space in the yard. Some were on perches. The yard was full of animals, but even they were crowded out by the smell of a yard full of animals. And most of them were clearly very old, which didn't do anything for the smell. A toothless lion yawned at Vimes. A lion running, or at least lounging around loose, was amazing in itself, but not so amazing as the fact that it was being used as a cushion by an elderly griffon, which was asleep with all four claws in the air. There were hedgehogs, and a graying leopard, and molting pelicans. Green water surged in the pond, and a couple of hippos surfaced and yawned. Nothing was in a cage, and nothing was trying to eat anything else. "'Hurr! It takes people like that first time,' said the old man. He had a wooden leg. "'We're quite a happy little family.' Vimes turned and found himself looking at a small owl. "'My gods,' he said, "'that's a more pork, isn't it?' The old man's face broke into a happy smile. "'Oh, I can see thee knows thy heraldry,' he cackled. "'Daphne's ancestors came all the way from some islands on the other side of the hub. So they did.' Vimes took out his city-watch badge, and stared at the coat of arms embossed thereon. The old man looked over his shoulder. "'That's not her, of course,' he said, indicating the owl perched on the ankh. "'That was her great-grandma, Olive. A more pork on an ankh, see? That is a peon or play on words. Laugh, I nearly started. That's about as funny as you gets round here. "'What can we do with a mate for her, tell you the truth? And a female hippo. I mean, his lordship says we've got two hippos, which is right enough. I'm just saying it's not natural for Roderick and Keith. I ain't passing judgment. It's just not right, that's all I'm saying. What was thy name again?' "'Vimes, Sir Samuel Vimes. My wife made the appointment.' The old man cackled again. "'Tis usually so.' Moving quite fast, despite his wooden leg, the old man led the way through the steaming mounds of multi-species dung to the building on the other side of the yard. "'I expect this is good for the garden, anyway,' said Vimes, trying to make conversation. "'I tried it on my rhubarb,' said the old man, pushing open the door, but it grew to twenty feet tall, Sir, and then spontaneously caught fire. "'Mind where the wiven's been, Sir? He's been ill. Oh, what a shame! Never mind, it'll scrape off beautiful when it dries. In thee goes, sire!' The hall inside was as quiet and dark as the yard had been full of light and noise. There was the dry, tombstone smell of old books and church towers. Above him, when his eyes got used to the darkness, Vimes could make out hanging flags and banners. There were a few windows, but cobwebs and dead flies meant that the light they allowed in was merely grey. The old man had shut the door and left him alone. Vimes watched through the window as he limped back to continue what he had been doing before Vimes's appearance. What he had been doing was setting up a living coat of arms. There was a large shield. Cabbages, actual cabbages, had been nailed to it. The old man said something that Vimes couldn't hear. The little owl fluttered from its perch and landed on a large ankh that had been glued to the top of the shield. The two hippos flopped out of their pool and took up station on either side. The old man unfolded an easel in front of the scene, placed a canvas on it, picked up a palette and brush, and shouted, Hup! Blah! The hippos reared rather arthritically. The owl spread its wings. Good gods! murmured Vimes. I always thought they'd just made it up. Made it up, sir? Made it up? said a voice behind him. We'd soon be in trouble if we made things up. Oh, dear me, yes! Vimes turned. Another little old man had appeared behind him, blinking happily through thick glasses. He had several scrolls under one arm. I'm sorry I couldn't meet you at the gate, but we're very busy at the moment, he said, holding out his spare hand. Croissant rouge, pièce huivante. Uh, you're a small red breakfast roll? said Vimes, nonplussed. No, no, no. It means red crescent. It's my title, you see. Very ancient title. I'm a herald. You'd be Sir Samuel Vimes, yes? Yes. Red Crescent consulted a scroll. Good, good. How do you feel about weasels? he said. Weasels? We have got some weasels, you see. I know they're not strictly a heraldic animal, but we seem to have some on the strength, and frankly I think I'm going to have to let them go unless we can persuade someone to adopt them, and that's upset Pardessus Chateen Persuivant. He always locks himself in his shed when he's upset. Pardessus? You mean the old man out there? said Vimes. I mean, why is he—I thought—you—I mean, a coat of arms is just a design. You don't have to paint it from life. Red Crescent looked shocked. Well, I suppose if you want to make a complete mockery of the whole thing, yes, you could just make it up. You could do that, he said. Not weasels, then? Personally, I'd just as soon not bother, said Vimes, and certainly not with a weasel. My wife said that dragons would— Happily, the occasion will not arise, said a voice in the shadows. It wasn't the right sort of voice to hear in any kind of light. It was dust-dry. It sounded as if it came from a mouth that had never known the pleasures of spittle. It sounded dead. It was. The bakery thieves considered their options. I've got my hand on my crossbow, said the most enterprising of the three. The most realistic said, Have you? Well, I've got my heart in my mouth. Ooh, said the third, I've got a weak heart, me. Yeah, but what I mean is he's not even wearing a sword. If I take the wolf, the two of you should be able to deal with him with no trouble, right? The one clear-thinker looked at Captain Carrot. His armour shone. So did the muscles on his bare arms. Even his knees gleamed. It seems to me that we have a bit of an impasse, or stand-off, said Captain Carrot. How about if we throw down the money, said the clear-thinker. That would certainly help matters. And you'd let us go? No, but it would definitely count in your favour, and I would certainly speak up on your behalf. The bold one with the crossbow licked his lips and glanced from Carrot to the wolf. If you set it on us, I warn you, something's going to get killed, he warned. Yes, it could happen, said Carrot sadly. I'd prefer to avoid that, if at all possible. He raised his hands. There was something flat and round, and about six inches across in each one. This, he said, is dwarf bread. Some of Mr. Ironcrust's best. It's not classic battle-bread, of course, but it's probably good enough for slicing. Carrot's arm blurred. There was a brief flurry of sawdust, and the flat loaf spun to a stop halfway through the thick timbers of the cart, and about half an inch away from the man with the weak heart, and as it turned out, a fragile bladder, too. The man with the crossbow tore his attention away from the bread only when he felt a slight damp pressure on his wrist. There was no way that an animal could have moved that fast, but there it was, and the wolf's expression contrived to indicate very calmly that if the animal so desired, the pressure could be increased more or less indefinitely. Call it off, he said, flinging the bow away with his free hand. Tell it to let go. Oh, I never tell her anything, said Carrot. She makes up her own mind. There was a clatter of iron-shod boots, and half a dozen axe-bearing dwarfs raced out of the bakery gates, kicking up sparks as they skidded to a halt beside Carrot. Get them! shouted Mr. Ironcrust. Carrot dropped a hand on top of the dwarf's helmet and turned him round. It's me, Mr. Ironcrust, he said. I believe these are the men. Right you are, Captain Carrot, said the dwarf baker. Come on, lads, let's hang them up by the burazaka. Town Hall Oh, murmured the weak of heart, damply. But now, Mr. Ironcrust, said Carrot, patiently, we don't practice that punishment in Ankh-Morpork. Because Ankh-Morpork doesn't have a town hall. They bashed beyond tight-bridges senseless, and they kicked O'Left-Strong in the arm in the bud, k'zass! Yeast-Bowl We'll cut that, Mr. Ironcrust. The dwarf baker hesitated, and then, to the amazement and relief of the thieves, took a step backwards. Yeah. All right, Captain Carrot. If you say so. I have business elsewhere, but I would be grateful if you would take them and turn them over to the Thieves' Guild, said Carrot. The quick thinker went pale. Oh, no, they get really intense about unlicensed thieving. Anything but the Thieves' Guild. Carrot turned. The light caught his face in a certain way. Anything, he said. The unlicensed thieves looked at one another, and then all spoke at once. The Thieves' Guild. Fine. We like the Thieves' Guild. Can't wait. Thieves' Guild. Here I come. Fine body of men. Firm but fair. Good, said Carrot. Then everyone's happy. Oh, yes. He dug into his money-pouch. Here's five pence for the loaf, Mr. Ironcrust. I've handled the other one, but you should be able to sand it off with no trouble. The dwarf blinked at the coins. You want to pay me for saving my money? he said. As a taxpayer, you are entitled to the protection of the watch, said Carrot. There was a delicate pause. Mr. Ironcrust stared at his feet. One or two of the other dwarfs started to snigger. I'll tell you what, said Carrot in a kindly voice. I'll come round when I get a moment and help you fill in the forms. How about that? A thief broke the embarrassed silence. Er, could your little dog let go of my arm, please? The wolf released its grip, jumped down, and padded over to Carrot, who raised his hand to his helmet respectfully. Good day to you all, he said, and strode away. Thieves and victims watched him go. Is he real? said the quick-thinker. There was a growl from the baker, then. You bastards! he shouted. You bastards! Wha-wha-what? You got your money back, haven't you? Two of his employees had to hold Mr. Ironcrust back. Three years, he said. Three years, and no one bothered. Three bloody years, and not so much as a knock at the door, and he'll ask me. Oh, yes, he'll be nice about it. He'll probably even go and get the extra forms, so I won't be put to the trouble. Why couldn't you buggers have just run away? Vimes peered around the shadowy, musty room. The voice might as well have come from a tomb. A panicky look crossed the face of the little herald. Perhaps Sir Samuel would be kind enough to step this way, said the voice. It was chilly, clipping every syllable with precision. It was the kind of voice that didn't blink. Uh, that is, in fact, a, uh, um, dragon, said Red Crescent. Vimes reached for his sword. Dragon, King of Arms, said the man. King of Arms, said Vimes. Merely a title, said the voice. Pray enter. For some reason the words re-spelled themselves in Vimes's hindbrain.