talked to her mother about why she named her daughter Temptress. She said she was watching the Cosby show and liked the young actress. I told her the actress's name was actually Tempest Bledsoe. She said she found that out later, that they misspelled the name. I asked her if she knew what Temptress meant, and she said she also found that out at some later point. Her daughter was charged with ungovernable behavior, which included bringing men into the home while the mother was at work. I asked the mother if she had ever thought the daughter was living out her name. Most all of this went completely over her head. Was Temptress actually living out her name as Judge Duggan saw it, or would she have wound up in trouble even if her mother had named her Chastity? It isn't much of a stretch to assume that Temptress didn't have ideal parents. Not only was her mother willing to name her Temptress in the first place, but she wasn't smart enough to know what the word even meant. Nor is it so surprising on some level that a boy named Amature would end up in family court. People who can't be bothered to come up with a name for their child aren't likely to be the best parents either. So, does the name you give your child affect his life, or is it your life reflected in his name? In either case, what kind of signal does a child's name send to the world, and most important, does it really matter? As it happens, Loser and Winner, Temptress and Amature were all black. Is this fact merely a curiosity, or does it have something larger to say about names and culture? Every generation seems to produce a few marquee academics who advance the thinking on black culture. Roland G. Fryer, Jr., the young black economist who analyzed the acting white phenomenon and the black-white test score gap, may be among the next. His ascension has been unlikely. An indifferent high school student from an unstable family, he went to the University of Texas at Arlington on an athletic scholarship. Two things happened to him there. He quickly realized he would never make the NFL or the NBA, and, taking his studies seriously for the first time in his life, he found he liked them. After graduate work at Penn State and the University of Chicago, he was hired as a Harvard professor at age 25. His reputation for candid thinking on race was already well-established. Fryer's mission is the study of black underachievement. One could rattle off all the statistics about blacks not doing so well. He says, You can look at the black-white differential in out-of-wedlock births or infant mortality or life expectancy. Blacks are the worst-performing ethnic group on SATs. Blacks are in less than whites. They are still just not doing well, period. I basically want to figure out where blacks went wrong, and I want to devote my life to this. In addition to economic and social disparity between blacks and whites, Fryer has become intrigued by the virtual segregation of culture. Blacks and whites watch different television shows. Monday Night Football is the only show that typically appears on each group's top ten list. Seinfeld, one of the most popular sitcoms in history, never ranked in the top fifty among blacks. They smoke different cigarettes. Newports enjoy a 75% market share among black teenagers versus 12% among whites. The white teenagers are mainly smoking Marlboros. And black parents give their children names that are starkly different from white children's. Fryer came to wonder, is distinctive black culture a cause of the economic disparity between blacks and whites, or merely a reflection of it? As with the ECLS study, Fryer went looking for the answer in a mountain of data—birth certificate information for every child born in California since 1961. The data, covering more than 16 million births, included standard items such as name, gender, race, birth weight, and the parent's marital status, as well as more telling factors about the parents—their zip code, which indicates socioeconomic status and a neighborhood's racial composition, their means of paying the hospital bill, again, an economic indicator, and their level of education. The California data prove just how dissimilarly black and white parents name their children. White and Asian American parents, meanwhile, give their children remarkably similar names. There is some disparity between white and Hispanic American parents, but it is slim compared to the black-white naming gap. The data also show the black-white gap to be a recent phenomenon. Until the early 1970s, there was a great overlap between black and white first names. The typical baby girl born in a black neighborhood in 1970 was given a name that was twice as common among blacks than whites. By 1980, she received a name that was 20 times more common among blacks. Boys' names moved in the same direction but less aggressively, probably because parents of all races are less adventurous with boys' names than girls. Given the location and timing of this change—dense urban areas where Afro-American activism was gaining strength—the most likely cause of the explosion in distinctively black names was the Black Power Movement, which sought to accentuate African culture and fight claims of black inferiority. If this naming revolution was indeed inspired by black power, it would be one of the movement's most enduring remnants. Afros today are rare. Dashikis even rarer. Black Panther founder Bobby Seal is best known today for peddling a line of barbecue products. A great many black names today are unique to blacks. More than 40% of the black girls born in California in a given year receive a name that not one of the roughly 100,000 baby white girls received that year. Even more remarkably, nearly 30% of the black girls are given a name that is unique among every baby, white and black, born that year in California. There were also 228 babies named unique during the 1990s alone. Even among very popular black names, there is little overlap with whites. Of the 626 girls named Deja in the 1990s, 591 were black. Of the 454 girls named Precious, 431 were black. Of the 318 Shanises, 310 were black. What kind of parent is most likely to give a child such a distinctively black name? The data offer a clear answer. An unmarried, low-income, undereducated teenage mother from a black neighborhood who has a distinctively black name herself. In Roland Fryer's view, giving a child a super black name is a black parent's signal of solidarity with the community. If I start naming my kid Madison, he says, you might think, oh, you want to go live across the railroad tracks, don't you? If black kids who study calculus and ballet are thought to be acting white, Fryer says, then mothers who call their babies Shanise are simply acting black. The California study shows that many white parents send as strong a signal in the opposite direction. More than 40% of the white babies are given names that are at least four times more common among whites. Consider Connor and Cody, Emily and Abigail. In one recent 10-year stretch, each of these names was given to at least 2,000 babies in California, fewer than 2% of them black. So, what are the whitest names and the blackest names? Here are the 20 whitest girl names. Molly, Amy, Claire, Emily, Katie, Madeline, Caitlin, Emma, Abigail, Carly, Jenna, Heather, Catherine, Caitlin, another spelling, a third spelling, Holly, Allison, fourth Caitlin, Hannah, and another spelling of Catherine. Now, the 20 blackest girl names. Imani, Ebony, Shanise, Aaliyah, Precious, Nia, Deja, Diamond, Asia, another Aaliyah, Jada, Tiara, Tiara, Kiara, Jasmine, another Jasmine, a third spelling of Jasmine, a fourth spelling of Jasmine, Alexis, and Raven. Now, the 20 whitest boy names. Jake, Connor, Tanner, Wyatt, Cody, Dustin, Luke, Jack, Scott, Logan, Cole, Lucas, Bradley, Jacob, Garrett, Dylan, Maxwell, Hunter, Brett, and Colin. And now, the 20 blackest boy names. Deshawn, Deandre, Marcus, Darnell, Terrell, Malik, Trevin, Tyrone, Willie, Dominique, Demetrius, Reginald, Jamal, Maurice, Jalen, Darius, Xavier, Terrence, Andre, and Daryl. So, how does it matter if you have a very white name or a very black name? Over the years, a series of audit studies have tried to measure how people perceive different names. In a typical audit study, a researcher would send two identical and fake resumes, one with a traditionally white name and the other with an immigrant or minority-sounding name, to potential employers. The white resumes have always gleaned more job interviews. According to such a study, if Deshawn Williams and Jake Williams sent identical resumes to the same employer, Jake Williams would be more likely to get a callback. The implication is that black-sounding names carry an economic penalty. Such studies are tantalizing but severely limited for they can't explain why Deshawn didn't get the call. Was he rejected because the employer is a racist and he's convinced that Deshawn Williams is black? Or did he reject him because Deshawn sounds like someone from a low-income, low-education family? A resume is a fairly undependable set of clues. A recent study showed that more than 50% of them contain lies. So Deshawn may simply signal a disadvantaged background to an employer who believes that workers from such backgrounds are undependable. Nor do the black-white audit studies predict what might have happened in a job interview. What if the employer is racist and if he unwittingly agreed to interview a black person who happened to have a white-sounding name, would he be any more likely to hire the black applicant after meeting face-to-face? Or is the interview a painful and discouraging waste of time for the black applicant? That is an economic penalty for having a white-sounding name. Along those same lines, perhaps a black person with a white name pays an economic penalty in the black community. And what of the potential advantage to be gained in the black community by having a distinctively black name? But because the audit studies can't measure the actual life outcomes of the fictitious Deshawn Williams versus Jake Williams, they can't assess the broader impact of a distinctively black name. Maybe Deshawn should just change his name. People do this all the time, of course. The clerks in New York City's civil court recently reported that name changes are at an all-time high. Some of the changes are purely, if bizarrely, aesthetic. A young couple named Natalie Jaramajenko and Dalton Conley recently renamed their four-year-old son Yo Zing Heno Augustus Eisner Alexander Weiser Knuckles Jaramajenko Conley. Some people change names for economic purposes. After a New York livery cab driver named Michael Goldberg was shot in early 2004, it was reported that Mr. Goldberg was, in fact, an Indian-born Sikh who thought it advantageous to take a Jewish name upon immigrating to New York. Goldberg's decision might have puzzled some people in show business circles, where it is a time-honored tradition to change Jewish names. Thus did Isor Danielewicz become Kirk Douglas. Thus did the William Morris Agency rise to prominence under its namesake, the former Zelman Moses. The question is, would Zelman Moses have done as well had he not become William Morris? And would Deshaun Williams do any better if he called himself Jake Williams or Connor Williams? It's tempting to think so, just as it is tempting to think that a truckload of children's books will make a child smarter. Though the audit studies can't be used to truly measure how much a name matters, the California names data can. How? The California data included not only each baby's vital statistics, but information about the mother's level of education, income, and most significantly, her own date of birth. This last fact made it possible to identify the hundreds of thousands of California mothers who had themselves been born in California, and then to link them to their own birth records. Now, a new and extremely potent story emerged from the data. It was possible to track the life outcome of any individual woman. This is the sort of data chain that researchers dream about, making it possible to identify a set of children who were born under similar circumstances, then locate them again 20 or 30 years later to see how they turned out. Among the hundreds of thousands of such women in the California data, many bore distinctively black names, and many others did not. Using regression analysis to control for other factors that might influence life trajectories, it was then possible to measure the impact of a single factor, in this case, a woman's first name, on her educational, income, and health outcomes. So, does a name matter? The data show that, on average, a person with a distinctively black name, whether it's a woman named Imani or a man named Deshawn, does have a worse life outcome than a woman named Molly or a man named Jake. But it isn't the fault of their names. If two black boys, Jake Williams and Deshawn Williams, are born in the same neighborhood and into the same familial and economic circumstances, they would likely have similar life outcomes. But the kind of parents who name their son Jake don't tend to live in the same neighborhoods or share economic circumstances with the kind of parents who name their son Deshawn. And that's why, on average, a boy named Jake will tend to earn more money and get more education than a boy named Deshawn. A Deshawn is more likely to have been handicapped by a low-income, low-education, single-parent background. His name is an indicator, not a cause, of his outcome. Just as a child with no books in his home isn't likely to test well in school, a boy named Deshawn isn't likely to do as well in life. And what if Deshawn had changed his name to Jake or Connor? Would his situation improve? Here's a guess. Anybody who bothers to change his name in the name of economic success is, like the high school freshman in Chicago who entered the school choice lottery, at least highly motivated. And motivation is probably a stronger indicator of success than, well, a name. Just as the ECLS data answered questions about parenting that went well beyond the black-white test gap, the California Names data tell a lot of stories in addition to the one about distinctively black names. Broadly speaking, the data tell us how parents see themselves and, more significantly, what kind of expectations they have for their children. Here's a question to begin with. Where does the name come from anyway? Not that it is the actual source of the name. That much is usually obvious. There's the Bible. There's the huge cluster of traditional English and Germanic and Italian and French names. There are princess names and hippie names, nostalgic names, and place names. Increasingly, there are brand names—Lexus, Armani, Bacardi, Timberland—and what might be called aspirational names. The California data show eight Harvards born during the 1990s, all of them black, 15 Yales, all white, and 18 Princetons, all black. There were no doctors but three lawyers, all black, nine judges, eight of them white, three senators, all white, and two presidents, both black. Then there are the invented names. Roland G. Fryer Jr., while discussing his name's research on a radio show, took a call from a black woman who was upset with the name just given to her baby niece. It was pronounced Shateed but was in fact shithead. Or consider the twin boys, Orange Jello and Lemon Jello, also black, whose parents further dignify their choice by instituting this pronunciation, Arangelo and Lamangelo. Arangelo, Lamangelo, and Shateed have yet to catch on among the masses but other names do. How does a name migrate through the population and why? Is it purely a matter of zeitgeist or is there a more sensible explanation? We all know that names rise and fall and rise, witness the return of Sophie and Max from near extinction, but is there a discernible pattern to these movements? The answer lies in the California data and the answer is yes. Among the most interesting revelations in the data is the correlation between a baby's name and the parent's socioeconomic status. Consider the most common female names found in middle-income white households versus low-income white households. These and other lists to follow include data from the 1990s alone to ensure a large sample that is also current. So here are the most common middle-income white girl names. Sarah, Emily, Jessica, Lauren, Ashley, Amanda, Megan, Samantha, Hannah, Rachel, Nicole, Taylor, Elizabeth, Catherine, Madison, Jennifer, Alexandra, Brittany, Danielle, and Rebecca. And now the most common low-income white girl names. Ashley, Jessica, Amanda, Samantha, Brittany, Sarah, Kayla, Amber, Megan, Taylor, Emily, Nicole, Elizabeth, Heather, Alyssa, Stephanie, Jennifer, Hannah, Courtney, and Rebecca. There is considerable overlap between the two lists to be sure, but keep in mind that these are the most common names of all and consider the size of the data set. The difference between consecutive positions on these lists may represent several hundred or even several thousand children. So if Brittany is number 5 on the low-income list and number 18 on the middle-income list, you can be assured that Brittany is a decidedly low-end name.