quite early. Most of JT's foot soldiers were unwilling to stay foot soldiers for long after they realized they weren't advancing, especially once the shooting started. After several relatively peaceful years, JT's gang got involved in a turf war with a neighboring gang. Drive-by shootings became a daily event. For a foot soldier, the gang's man on the street, this development was particularly dangerous. The nature of the business demanded that customers be able to find him easily and quickly. If he hid from the other gang, he couldn't sell his crack. Until the gang war, JT's foot soldiers had been willing to balance the risky low-paying job with the reward of advancement. But as one foot soldier told Venkatesh, he now wanted to be compensated for the added risk. Would you stand around here when all this shit is going on? No, right? So if I'm gonna be asked to put my life on the line, then front me the cash, man. Pay me more, cuz it ain't worth my time to be here when they're warring. JT hadn't wanted this war. For one thing, he was forced to pay his foot soldiers higher wages because of the added risk. Far worse, gang warfare was bad for business. If Burger King and McDonald's launch a price war to gain market share, they partly make up in volume what they lose in price. Nor is anyone getting shot. But with a gang war, sales plummet because customers are so scared of the violence that they won't come out in the open to buy their crack. In every way, war was expensive for JT. So why did he start the war? As a matter of fact, he didn't. It was his foot soldiers who started it. It turns out that a crack boss didn't have as much control over his subordinates as he would have liked. That's because they had different incentives. For JT, violence was a distraction from the business at hand. He would have preferred that his members never fired a single gunshot. For a foot soldier, however, violence served a purpose. One of the few ways that a foot soldier could distinguish himself and advance in the tournament was by proving his mettle for violence. A killer was respected, feared, talked about. A foot soldier's incentive was to make a name for himself. JT's incentive was, in effect, to keep the foot soldiers from doing so. We try to tell these shorties that they belong to a serious organization, he once told Venkatesh. It ain't all about killing. They see these movies and shit, they think it's all about running around tearing shit up. But it's not. You've got to learn to be part of an organization. You can't be fighting all the time. It's bad for business. In the end, JT prevailed. He oversaw the gang's expansion and ushered in a new era of prosperity and relative peace. JT was a winner. He was paid well because so few people could do what he did. He was a tall, good-looking, smart, tough man who knew how to motivate people. He was shrewd, too, never tempting arrest by carrying guns or cash. While the rest of his gang lived in poverty with their mothers, JT had several homes, several women, several cars. He also had his business education, of course. He constantly worked to extend this advantage. That was why he ordered the corporate-style bookkeeping that eventually found its way into Sudhir Venkatesh's hands. No other franchise leader had ever done such a thing. JT once showed his ledgers to the board of directors to prove, as if proof were needed, the extent of his business acumen. And it worked. After six years running his local gang, JT was promoted to the board of directors. He was now 34 years old. He had won the tournament. But this tournament had a catch that publishing and pro sports and even Hollywood don't have. Selling drugs, after all, is illegal. Not long after he made the board of directors, the Black Disciples were essentially shut down by a federal indictment. The same indictment that led the gangster named Booty to turn over his notebooks to Venkatesh. And JT was sent to prison. Now for another unlikely question. What did crack cocaine have in common with nylon stockings? In 1939, when DuPont introduced nylons, countless American women felt as if a miracle had been performed in their honor. Until then, stockings were made of silk. And silk was delicate, expensive, and in ever shorter supply. By 1941, some 64 million pairs of nylon stockings had been sold. More stockings than there were adult women in the United States. They were easily affordable, immensely appealing, practically addictive. DuPont had pulled off the feet that every marketer dreams of. It brought class to the masses. In this regard, the invention of nylon stockings was markedly similar to the invention of crack cocaine. In the 1970s, if you were the sort of person who did drugs, there was no classier drug than cocaine. Beloved by rock stars and movie stars, ballplayers, and even the occasional politician, cocaine was a drug of power and panache. It was clean. It was white. It was pretty. Heroin was droopy and pot was foggy, but cocaine provided a beautiful high. Alas, it was also very expensive. Nor did the high last long. This led cocaine users to try jacking up the drug's potency. They did this primarily by freebasing, adding ammonia and ethyl ether to cocaine hydrochloride, or powdered cocaine, and burning it to free up the base cocaine. But this could be dangerous. As Richard Pryor famously proved, he nearly killed himself while freebasing, chemistry is best left to chemists. Meanwhile, cocaine dealers and aficionados across the country, and perhaps also in the Caribbean and South America, were working on a safer version of distilled cocaine. They found that mixing powdered cocaine in a saucepan with baking soda and water, and then cooking off the liquid, produced tiny rocks of smokable cocaine. It came to be called crack for the crackling sound the baking soda made when it was burned. More affectionate nicknames would soon follow. Rock, Kryptonite, Kibbles and Bits, Scrabble, and Love. By the early 1980s, the class drug was ready for the masses. Now only two things were needed to turn crack into a phenomenon. An abundant supply of raw cocaine, and a way to get the new product to a mass market. The cocaine was easy to come by, for the invention of crack coincided with a Colombian cocaine glut. During the 1970s, the wholesale price of cocaine in the United States fell dramatically, even as its purity was rising. One man, a Nicaraguan emigre named Oscar Daniel Blandon, was suspected of importing far more Colombian cocaine than anyone else. Blandon did so much business with the budding crack dealers of South Central Los Angeles, that he came to be known as the Johnny Appleseed of crack. Blandon would later claim that he was selling the cocaine to raise money for the CIA-sponsored Contras back home in Nicaragua. He liked to say that the CIA was in turn watching his back in the United States, allowing him to sell cocaine with impunity. This claim would spark a belief that still seethes to this day, especially among urban blacks, that the CIA itself was the chief sponsor of the American crack trade. Verifying that claim is beyond our purview. What is demonstrably true is that Oscar Daniel Blandon helped establish a link between Colombian cocaine cartels and inner-city crack merchants that would alter American history. By putting massive amounts of cocaine into the hands of street gangs, Blandon and others like him gave rise to a devastating crack boom, and gangs like the Black Gangster Disciple Nation were given new reason to exist. As long as there have been cities, there have been gangs of one sort or another. In the United States, gangs have traditionally been a sort of halfway house for recent immigrants. In the 1920s, Chicago alone had more than 1,300 street gangs catering to every ethnic, political, and criminal leaning imaginable. As a rule, gangs would prove much better at making mayhem than money. Some fancied themselves commercial enterprises, and a few, the mafia most notably, actually did make money, at least for the higher-ups. But most gangsters were, as the cliche assures us, two-bit gangsters. Black street gangs in particular flourished in Chicago, with membership in the tens of thousands by the 1970s. They constituted the sort of criminals, petty and otherwise, who sucked the life out of urban areas. Part of the problem was that these criminals never seemed to get locked up. The 1960s and 1970s were, in retrospect, a great time to be a street criminal in most American cities. The likelihood of punishment was so low—this was the heyday of a liberal justice system and the criminal rights movement—that it simply didn't cost very much to commit a crime. By the 1980s, however, U.S. courts had begun to radically reverse that trend. Criminals' rights were curtailed and stricter sentencing guidelines put in place. More and more of Chicago's black gangsters were getting sent to federal prisons. By happy coincidence, some of their fellow inmates were Mexican gang members with close ties to Colombian drug dealers. In the past, the black gangsters had bought their drugs from a middleman, the mafia, which, as it happened, was then being pummeled by the federal government's new anti-racketeering laws. But by the time crack came to Chicago, the black gangsters had made the connections to buy their cocaine directly from Colombian dealers. Cocaine had never been a big seller in the ghetto—it was too expensive—but that was before the invention of crack. This new product was ideal for a low-income, street-level customer. Because it required such a tiny amount of pure cocaine, one hit of crack cost only a few dollars. Its powerful high reached the brain in just a few seconds and then faded fast, sending the user back for more. From the outset, crack was bound to be a huge success. And who better to sell it than the thousands of junior members of all those street gangs like the Black Gangster Disciple Nation? The gangs already owned the territory—real estate was, in essence, their core business—and they were suitably menacing to keep customers from even thinking about ripping them off. Suddenly, the urban street gang evolved from a club for wayward teenagers into a true commercial enterprise. The gang also presented an opportunity for longtime employment. Before crack, it was just about impossible to earn a living in a street gang. When it was time for a gangster to start supporting a family, he would have to quit. There was no such thing as a 30-year-old gangster. He was either working a legitimate job, dead, or in prison. But with crack, there was real money to be made. Instead of moving on and making way for the younger gangsters to ascend, the veterans stayed put. This was happening just as the old-fashioned sort of lifetime jobs— factory jobs, especially—were disappearing. In the past, a semi-skilled black man in Chicago could earn a decent wage working in a factory. With that option disappearing, dealing crack looked even better. How hard could it be? The stuff was so addictive that a fool could sell it. Who cared if the crack gang was a tournament that only a few of them could possibly win? Who cared if it was so dangerous, standing out there on a corner, selling it as fast and anonymously as McDonald's sells hamburgers, not knowing any of your customers, wondering who might be coming to arrest or rob or kill you? Who cared if your product got 12-year-olds and grandmothers and preachers so addicted that they stopped thinking about anything except their next hit? Who cared if crack killed the neighborhood? For black Americans, the four decades between World War II and the crack boom had been marked by steady and often dramatic improvement. Particularly since the civil rights legislation of the mid-1960s, the telltale signs of societal progress had finally taken root among black Americans. The black-white income gap was shrinking. So was the gap between black children's test scores and those of white children. Perhaps the most heartening gain had been in infant mortality. As late as 1964, a black infant was twice as likely to die as a white infant, often of a cause as shamefully basic as diarrhea or pneumonia. With segregated hospitals, many black patients received what amounted to third-world care. But that changed when the federal government ordered the hospitals to be desegregated. Within just seven years, the black infant mortality rate had been cut in half. By the 1980s, virtually every facet of life was improving for black Americans, and the progress showed no sign of stopping. Then came crack. While crack use was hardly a black-only phenomenon, it hit black neighborhoods much harder than most. The evidence can be seen by measuring the same indicators of societal progress cited earlier. After decades of decline, black infant mortality began to soar in the 1980s, as did the rate of low birth weight babies and parent abandonment. The gap between black and white schoolchildren opened back up. The number of blacks sent to prison tripled. Crack was so dramatically destructive that if its effect is average for all black Americans, not just crack users and their relatives, you will see that the group's post-war progress was not only stopped cold, but was often knocked as much as 10 years backward. Nearly any statistic you choose to examine, from education to life expectancy, will show you that black Americans were hurt more by crack cocaine than by any other single cause since Jim Crow. And then there was the crime. Within a five-year period, the homicide rate among young urban blacks quadrupled. Suddenly, it was just as dangerous to live in parts of Chicago or St. Louis or Los Angeles as it was to live in Bogota. The violence associated with the crack boom was various and relentless. It coincided with an even broader American crime wave that had been building for two decades. Although the rise of this crime wave long predated crack, the trend was so exacerbated by crack that criminologists got downright apocalyptic in their predictions. James Alan Fox, perhaps the most widely quoted expert in the popular press, warned of a coming bloodbath of youth violence. But Fox and the other purveyors of conventional wisdom were wrong. The bloodbath did not materialize. The crime rate, in fact, began to fall so unexpectedly and dramatically and thoroughly that now, from the distance of several years, it is almost hard to recall the crushing grip of that crime wave. And why did it fall? For a few reasons, but one of them more surprising than the rest. Oscar De Niro Blandon, the so-called Johnny Appleseed of crack, may have been the instigator of one ripple effect in which, by his actions, a single person inadvertently causes an ocean of despair. But unbeknownst to just about everybody, another remarkably powerful ripple effect, this one moving in the opposite direction, had just come into play. Chapter 4. Where Have All the Criminals Gone? In 1966, one year after Nicolae Ceausescu became the communist dictator of Romania, he made abortion illegal. The fetus is the property of the entire society, he proclaimed. Anyone who avoids having children is a deserter who abandons the laws of national continuity. Such grandiose declarations were commonplace during Ceausescu's reign, for his master plan to create a nation worthy of the new socialist man was an exercise in grandiosity. He built palaces for himself while alternately brutalizing and neglecting his citizens. Abandoning agriculture in favor of manufacturing, he forced many of the nation's rural dwellers into unheated apartment buildings. He gave government positions to 40 family members, including his wife Elena, who required 40 homes and a commensurate supply of fur and jewels. Madame Ceausescu, known officially as the best mother Romania could have, was not in fact particularly maternal. The worms never get satisfied, regardless of how much food you give them, she said, when Romanians complained about the food shortages brought on by her husband's mismanagement. She had her own children bugged to ensure their loyalty. Ceausescu's ban on abortion was designed to achieve one of his major aims, to rapidly strengthen Romania by boosting its population. Until 1966, Romania had had one of the most liberal abortion policies in the world. Abortion was in fact the main form of birth control, with four abortions for every single live birth. Now, virtually overnight, abortion was forbidden. The only exemptions were mothers who already had four children or women with significant standing in the Communist Party. At the same time, all contraception and sex education were banned. Government agents, sardonically known as the menstrual police, regularly rounded up women in their workplaces to administer pregnancy tests. If a woman repeatedly failed to conceive, she was forced to pay a steep celibacy tax. Ceausescu's incentives produced the desired effect. Within one year of the abortion ban, the Romanian birth rate had doubled. These babies were born into a country where, unless you belonged to the Ceausescu clan or the communist elite, life was miserable. But these children would turn out to have particularly miserable lives. Compared to Romanian children born just one year earlier, the cohort of children born after the abortion ban would do worse in every measurable way. They would test lower in school, they would have less success in the labor market, and they would also prove much more likely to become criminals. The abortion ban stayed in effect until Ceausescu finally lost his grip on Romania. On December 16, 1989, thousands of people took to the streets of Timișoara to protest his corrosive regime. Many of the protesters were teenagers.