No, and no. Here's the breakdown. These are the five terms correlated to a higher sales price. Granite, state-of-the-art, corian, maple, and gourmet. And the five correlated to a lower sales price. Fantastic, spacious, charming, great neighborhood, and the exclamation point. Three of the five terms correlated with a higher sales price are physical descriptions of the house itself. Granite, corian, and maple. As information goes, such terms are specific and straightforward, and therefore pretty useful. If you like granite, you might like the house. But even if you don't, the word granite certainly does not connote a fixer-upper. Nor does the word gourmet or state-of-the-art. Both of which seem to tell a buyer that a house is, on some level, fantastic. The word fantastic, meanwhile, is a dangerously ambiguous adjective, as is charming. Both these words seem to be real estate agent code for a house that doesn't have many specific attributes worth describing. Quote, spacious homes, meanwhile, are often decrepit or impractical. Great neighborhood signals a buyer that, well, this house isn't very nice, but others nearby may be. And an exclamation point in a real estate ad is bad news for sure. A bid to paper over real shortcomings with false enthusiasm. If you study the words in the ad for a real estate agent's own home, meanwhile, you see that she indeed emphasizes descriptive terms, especially new, granite, maple, and move-in condition, and avoids empty adjectives, including wonderful, immaculate, and the telltale exclamation point. She patiently waits for the best buyer to come along. She might tell this buyer about a house nearby that just sold for $25,000 above the asking price, or another house that is currently the subject of a bidding war. She is careful to exercise every advantage of the information asymmetry she enjoys. But, like the funeral director, and the car salesman, and the life insurance company, the real estate agent's advantage has also been eroded by the Internet. After all, anyone selling a home can now get online and gather her own information about sales trends, and housing inventory, and mortgage rate tremors. The information has been set loose, and recent sales data show the results. Real estate agents still get a higher price for their own homes than comparable homes owned by their clients, but since the proliferation of real estate websites, the gap between the two prices has shrunk by a third. It would be naive to suppose that people abuse information only when they are acting as experts, or agents of commerce. Agents and experts are people too, which suggests that we are likely to abuse information in our personal lives as well, whether by withholding true information, or editing the information we choose to put forth. A real estate agent may wink and nod when she lists a well-maintained house, but we each have our equivalent hedges. Think about how you describe yourself during a job interview versus how you might describe yourself on a first date. For even more fun, compare that first date conversation to a conversation with the same person during your 10th year of marriage. Or, think about how you might present yourself if you were going on national television for the first time. What sort of image would you want to project? Perhaps you want to seem clever, or kind, or good-looking. Presumably, you don't want to come off as cruel or bigoted. During the heyday of the Ku Klux Klan, its members took pride in publicly disparaging anybody who wasn't a conservative white Christian. But public bigotry has since been vastly curtailed. Even subtle displays of bigotry, if they become public, are now costly. Trent Lott, the majority leader of the U.S. Senate, learned this in 2002, after making a toast at a 100th birthday party for Strom Thurmond, his fellow senator and a fellow Southerner. Lott made a reference in his toast to Thurmond's 1948 campaign for president, which was built on a platform of segregation. Mississippi, Lott's home state, was one of just four states that Thurmond carried. We're proud of it, Lott told the partygoers. And if the rest of the country had followed our lead, we wouldn't have had all these problems over all these years either. The implication that Lott was a fan of segregation raised enough of a fury that he was forced to quit his Senate leadership post. Even if you were a private citizen, you surely wouldn't want to seem bigoted while appearing in public. Might there be a way to test for discrimination in a public setting? Unlikely as it may seem, the television game show The Weakest Link provides a unique laboratory to study discrimination. An import from the United Kingdom, The Weakest Link for a short time became wildly popular in the United States. The game includes eight contestants, or in a later daytime version, six, who each answer trivia questions and compete for a single cash jackpot. But the player who answers the most questions correctly isn't necessarily the player who advances. After each round, every contestant votes to eliminate one other contestant. A player's trivia answering ability is presumably the only worthwhile factor to consider. Race, gender, and age wouldn't seem to matter. But do they? By measuring a contestant's actual votes against the votes that would truly best serve his self-interest, it's possible to tell if discrimination is at play. The voting strategy changes as the game progresses. In the first several rounds, it makes sense to eliminate bad players, since the jackpot only grows when correct answers are given. In later rounds, the strategic incentives are flipped. The value of building the jackpot is now outweighed by each contestant's desire to win the jackpot. It's easier to do that if you eliminate the other good players. So, roughly speaking, the typical contestant will vote to eliminate the worst players in the early rounds and the better players in the later rounds. The key to measuring the weakest link voting data is to tease out a contestant's playing ability from his race, gender, and age. If a young black man answers a lot of questions correctly, but is voted off early, discrimination would seem to be a factor. Meanwhile, if an elderly white woman doesn't answer a single question correctly and is still not voted off, some sort of discriminatory favoritism would seem to be at play. Again, keep in mind that all of this is happening on camera. A contestant knows that his friends, family, and co-workers are watching. So who, if anyone, is discriminated against on the weakest link? Not, as it turns out, blacks. An analysis of more than 160 episodes reveals that black contestants in both the early and late rounds of the game are eliminated at a rate commensurate with their trivia answers. The same is true for female contestants. In a way, neither of these findings is so surprising. Two of the most potent social campaigns of the past half century were the civil rights movement and the feminist movement, which demonized discrimination against blacks and women, respectively. So perhaps, you say hopefully, discrimination was practically eradicated during the 20th century, like polio. Or, more likely, it has become so unfashionable to discriminate against certain groups that all but the most insensitive people take pains to at least appear fair-minded, at least in public. This hardly means that discrimination itself has ended, only that people are embarrassed to show it. How might you determine whether the lack of discrimination against blacks and women represents a true absence or just a charade? The answer can be found by looking at other groups that society doesn't protect as well. Indeed, the weakest link voting data do indicate two kinds of contestants who are consistently discriminated against, the elderly and Hispanics. Among economists, there are two leading theories of discrimination. Interestingly, elderly weakest link contestants seem to suffer from one type of discrimination, while Hispanics suffer the other. The first type is called taste-based discrimination, which means that one person discriminates simply because he prefers to not interact with a particular type of other person. In the second type, known as information-based discrimination, one person believes that another type of person has poor skills and acts accordingly. On the weakest link, Hispanics suffer information-based discrimination. Other contestants seem to view the Hispanics as poor players, even when they are not. This perception translates into Hispanics being eliminated in the early rounds, even if they are doing well, and not eliminated in the later rounds, when other contestants want to keep the Hispanics around to weaken the field. Elderly players, meanwhile, are victims of taste-based discrimination. In the early rounds and late rounds, they are eliminated far out of proportion to their skills. It seems as if the other contestants—this is a show on which the average age is 34—simply don't want the older players around. It's quite possible that a typical weakest link contestant isn't even cognizant of his discrimination toward Hispanics and the elderly, or, in the case of blacks and women, his lack of discrimination. He is bound to be nervous, after all, and excited, playing a fast-moving game under the glare of television lights, which naturally suggests another question. How might that same person express his preferences and reveal information about himself in the privacy of his home? In a given year, some 40 million Americans swap intimate truths about themselves with complete strangers. It all happens on Internet dating sites. Some of them, like Match.com, eHarmony.com, and Yahoo! Singles, appeal to a broad audience. Others cater to more specific tastes—ChristianSingles.com, JDate.com, LatinMatcher.com, BlackSinglesConnection.com, CountryWesternSingles.com, USMilitarySingles.com, PlusSizeSingles.com, and Gay.com. Dating websites are the most successful subscription-based business on the Internet. Each site operates a bit differently, but the gist is this. You compose a personal ad about yourself that typically includes a photo, vital statistics, your income range, level of education, likes and dislikes, and so on. If the ad catches someone's fancy, that someone will email you and perhaps arrange a date. On many sites, you also specify your dating aims—long-term relationship, or a casual lover, or just looking. So, there are two massive layers of data to be mined here—the information that people include in their ads, and the level of response gleaned by any particular ad. Each layer of the data can be asked its own question. In the case of the ads, how forthright and honest are people when it comes to sharing their personal information? And in the case of the responses, what kind of information in personal ads is considered the most, or least, desirable? Two economists and a psychologist recently banded together to address these questions. Ali Hortaksu, Gunther Hitsch, and Don Ariely analyzed the data from one of the mainstream dating sites, focusing on roughly 30,000 users, half in Boston and half in San Diego. 57% of the users were men, and the median age range for all users was 26 to 35. Although they represented an adequate racial mix to reach some conclusions about race, they were predominantly white. They were also a lot richer, taller, skinnier, and better-looking than average. That, at least, is what they wrote about themselves. More than 4% of the online daters claimed to make over $200,000 a year, whereas fewer than 1% of typical internet users actually earned that much, suggesting that three of the four big earners were exaggerating. Male and female users typically reported that they are about an inch taller than the national average. As for weight, the men were in line with the national average, but the women typically said they weighed about 20 pounds less than the national average. Most impressively, fully 70% of the women claimed, quote, above-average looks, including 24% claiming very good looks. The online men, too, were gorgeous. 67% called themselves above-average, including 21% with very good looks. This leaves only about 30% of the users with average looks, including a paltry 1% with less-than-average looks, which suggests that the typical online dater is either a fabulist, a narcissist, or simply resistant to the meaning of average. Or, perhaps they are all just realists. As any real estate agent knows, the typical house isn't charming or fantastic, but unless you say it is, no one will even bother to come for a look. 28% of the women on the site said they were blonde, a number far beyond the national average, which indicates a lot of dying, or lying, or both. Some users, meanwhile, were bracingly honest. 8% of the men, about 1 in every 12, conceded that they were married, with half of these 8% reporting that they were, quote, happily married. But the fact that they were honest doesn't mean they were rash. Of the 258 happily married men in the sample, only 9 chose to post a picture of themselves. The reward of gaining a mistress was evidently outweighed by the risk of having your wife discover your personal ad. And what were you doing on that website, the husband might bluster, undoubtedly to no avail. Of the many ways to fail on a dating website, not posting a photo of yourself is perhaps the most certain. Not that the photo necessarily is a photo of yourself, it may be some better-looking stranger, but such deception would obviously backfire in time. A man who does not include his photo gets only one-fourth the volume of email response of a man who does. A woman who doesn't include her photo gets only one-sixth the response. A low-income, poorly-educated, unhappily-employed, not-very-attractive, slightly-overweight, and balding man, who posts his photo, stands a better chance of gleaning some emails than a man who says he makes $200,000 and is deadly handsome but doesn't post a photo. There are plenty of reasons someone might not post a photo. He's technically challenged, or is ashamed of being spotted by friends, or he's just plain unattractive. But as in the case of a brand-new car with a for-sale sign, prospective customers will assume he's got something seriously wrong under the hood. Getting a date is hard enough as it is. Fifty-seven percent of the men who post ads don't get even one email. Twenty-three percent of the women don't get a single response. The traits that do draw a big response, meanwhile, will not be a big surprise to anyone with even a passing knowledge of the sexes. In fact, the preferences expressed by online daters fit snugly with the most common stereotypes about men and women. For instance, men who say they want a long-term relationship do much better than men looking for an occasional lover. But women looking for an occasional lover do great. For men, a woman's looks are of paramount importance. For women, a man's income is terribly important. The richer a man is, the more emails he receives. But a woman's income appeal is a bell-shaped curve. Men do not want to date low-earning women, but once a woman starts earning too much, men seem to be scared off. Men want to date students, artists, musicians, veterinarians, and celebrities, while avoiding secretaries, retirees, and women in the military and law enforcement. Women do want to date military men, policemen, and firemen, possibly the result of a 9-11 effect like the higher payments to Paul Feldman's bagel business, as well as lawyers and financial executives. Women avoid laborers, actors, students, and men who work in food services or hospitality. For men, being short is a big disadvantage, which is probably why so many lie about it. But weight doesn't much matter. For women, being overweight is deadly, which is probably why they lie. For a man, having red hair or curly hair is a downer, as is baldness, but a shaved head is okay. For a woman, salt and pepper hair is bad, while blonde hair is very good. In addition to all the information about income, education, and looks, men and women on the dating site also listed their race. Furthermore, they were asked to indicate a preference regarding the race of their potential dates. The two preferences were, quote, the same as mine, or, quote, it doesn't matter. Like the contestants on The Weakest Link, the website users were now publicly declaring how they felt about people who didn't look like them. They would act on their actual preferences later in confidential emails to the people they wanted to date. Roughly half of the white women on the site and 80% of the white men declared that race didn't matter to them. But the response data tell a different story. The white men who said that race didn't matter sent 90% of their email queries to white women. The white women who said race didn't matter sent about 97% of their email queries to white men. Is it possible that race really didn't matter for these white women and men, and that they simply never happened to browse a non-white date that interested them? Or, more likely, did they say that race didn't matter because they wanted to come across, especially to potential mates of their own, as open-minded? The gulf between the information we publicly proclaim and the information we know to be true is often vast, or, put a more familiar way,