Economics is, at root, the study of incentives, how people get what they want or need, especially when other people want or need the same thing. Economists love incentives. They love to dream them up and enact them, study them and tinker with them. The typical economist believes the world has not yet invented a problem that he cannot fix if given a free hand to design the proper incentive scheme. His solution may not always be pretty. It may involve coercion or exorbitant penalties or the violation of civil liberties, but the original problem, rest assured, will be fixed. An incentive is a bullet, a lever, a key, an often tiny object with astonishing power to change a situation. We all learn to respond to incentives, negative and positive, from the outset of life. If you toddle over to the hot stove and touch it, you burn a finger. But if you bring home straight A's from school, you get a new bike. If you are spotted picking your nose in class, you get ridiculed. But if you make the basketball team, you move up the social ladder. If you break curfew, you get grounded. But if you ace your SATs, you get to go to a good college. If you flunk out of law school, you have to go to work at your father's insurance company. But if you perform so well that a rival company comes calling, you become a vice president and no longer have to work for your father. If you become so excited about your new vice president job that you drive home at 80 miles an hour, you get pulled over by the police and fined $100. But if you hit your sales projections and collect a year-end bonus, you not only aren't worried about the $100 ticket, but you can also afford to buy that Viking Range you've always wanted and on which your toddler can now burn her own finger. An incentive is simply a means of urging people to do more of a good thing and less of a bad thing. But most incentives don't come about organically. Someone, an economist or a politician or a parent, has to invent them. Your three-year-old eats all her vegetables for a week? She wins a trip to the toy store. A big steelmaker belches too much smoke into the air? The company is fined for each cubic foot of pollutants over the legal limit. Too many Americans aren't paying their share of income tax? It was the economist Milton Friedman who helped come up with a solution to this one, automatic tax withholding from employees' paychecks. There are three basic flavors of incentive, economic, social, and moral. Very often, a single incentive scheme will include all three varieties. Think about the anti-smoking campaign of recent years. The addition of a $3 per pack sin tax is a strong economic incentive against buying cigarettes. The banning of cigarettes in restaurants and bars is a powerful social incentive. And when the U.S. government asserts that terrorists raise money by selling black market cigarettes, that acts as a rather jarring moral incentive. Some of the most compelling incentives yet invented have been put in place to deter crime. Considering this fact, it might be worthwhile to take a familiar question, why is there so much crime in modern society, and stand it on its head, why isn't there a lot more crime? After all, every one of us regularly passes up opportunities to maim, steal, and defraud. The chance of going to jail, thereby losing your job, your house, and your freedom, all of which are essentially economic penalties, is certainly a strong incentive. But when it comes to crime, people also respond to moral incentives, they don't want to do something they consider wrong, and social incentives, they don't want to be seen by others as doing something wrong. For certain types of misbehavior, social incentives are terribly powerful. In an echo of Hester Prynne's Scarlet Letter, many American cities now fight prostitution with a shaming offensive, posting pictures of convicted johns and prostitutes on websites or on local access television. Which is a more horrifying deterrent, a $500 fine for soliciting a prostitute, or the thought of your friends and family ogling you on www.hookersandjohns.com. So, through a complicated, haphazard, and constantly readjusted web of economic, social, and moral incentives, modern society does its best to militate against crime. Some people would argue that we don't do a very good job, but taking the long view, that's clearly not true. Consider the historical trend in homicide, not including wars, which is both the most reliably measured crime and the best barometer of a society's overall crime rate. These statistics, compiled by the criminologist Manuel Eisner, track the historical homicide levels in five European regions, and they show that in every region, homicides have fallen dramatically over the centuries. The steep decline of these numbers suggests that, for one of the gravest human concerns, getting murdered, the incentives that we collectively cook up are working better and better. So, what was wrong with the incentive at the Israeli daycare centers? You have probably already guessed that the $3 fine was simply too small. For that price, a parent with one child could afford to be late every day and only pay an extra $60 each month, just one-sixth of the base fee. As babysitting goes, that's pretty cheap. What if the fine had been set at $100 instead of $3? That would have likely put an end to the late pickups, though it would have also engendered plenty of ill will. Any incentive is inherently a trade-off. The trick is to balance the extremes. But there was another problem with the daycare center fine. It substituted an economic incentive, the $3 penalty, for a moral incentive, the guilt that parents were supposed to feel when they came late. So, for just a few dollars each day, parents could buy off their guilt. Furthermore, the small size of the fine sent a signal to the parents that late pickups weren't such a big problem. If the daycare center suffers only $3 worth of pain for each late pickup, why bother to cut short my tennis game? Indeed, when the economists eliminated the $3 fine in the 17th week of their study, the number of late-arriving parents didn't change. Now they could arrive late, pay no fine, and feel no guilt. Such is the strange and powerful nature of incentives. A slight tweak can produce drastic and often unforeseen results. Thomas Jefferson noted this while reflecting on the tiny incentive that led to the Boston Tea Party and, in turn, the American Revolution. He said, So inscrutable is the arrangement of causes and consequences in this world that a two-penny duty on tea unjustly imposed in a sequestered part of it changes the conditions of all its inhabitants. In the 1970s, researchers conducted a study that, like the Israeli daycare study, pitted a moral incentive against an economic incentive. In this case, they wanted to learn about the motivation behind blood donations. Their discovery? When people are given a small stipend for donating blood, rather than simply being praised for their altruism, they tend to donate less blood. The stipend turned a noble act of charity into a painful way to make a few dollars, and it wasn't worth it. But what if the blood donors had been offered an incentive of $50, or $500, or $5,000? Surely the number of donors would have changed dramatically. But something else would have changed dramatically as well, for every incentive has its dark side. If a pint of blood were suddenly worth $5,000, you can be sure that plenty of people would take note. They might literally steal blood at knife point. They might pass off pig blood as their own. They might circumvent donation limits by using fake IDs. Whatever the incentive, whatever the situation, dishonest people will try to gain an advantage by whatever means necessary. Or, as W.C. Fields once said, a thing worth having is a thing worth cheating for. Who cheats? Well, just about anyone if the stakes are right. You might say to yourself, well, I don't cheat, regardless of the stakes. And then you might remember the time you cheated on, say, a board game last week, or the golf ball you nudged out of its bad lie, or the time you really wanted a bagel in the office break room, but couldn't come up with the dollar you were supposed to drop in the coffee can, and then you took the bagel anyway, and told yourself you'd pay double next time, and didn't. For every clever person who goes to the trouble of creating an incentive scheme, there is an army of people, clever and otherwise, who will inevitably spend even more time trying to beat it. Cheating may or may not be human nature, but it is certainly a prominent feature in just about every human endeavor. Cheating is a primordial economic act, getting more for less. So it isn't just the bold-faced names, inside-trading CEOs and pill-popping ballplayers and perk-abusing politicians who cheat. It is the waitress who pockets her tips instead of pooling them. It is the Walmart payroll manager who goes into the computer and shaves his employees' hours to make his own performance look better. It is the third grader who, worried about not making it to the fourth grade, copies test answers from the kid sitting next to him. Some cheating leaves barely a shadow of evidence. In other cases, the evidence is massive. Consider what happened one spring evening at midnight in 1987. Seven million American children suddenly disappeared. The worst kidnapping wave in history? Hardly. It was the night of April 15th, and the Internal Revenue Service had just changed a rule. Instead of merely listing each dependent child by name, tax filers were now required to provide a Social Security number for each child. Suddenly, seven million children, children who had existed only as phantom exemptions on the previous year's 1040 forms, vanished, representing about one in ten of all dependent children in the United States. The incentive for those cheating taxpayers was quite clear. The same for the waitress, the payroll manager, and the third grader. But what about that third grader's teacher? Might she have an incentive to cheat? And if so, how would she do it? Imagine now that instead of running a daycare center in Haifa, you are running the Chicago Public Schools, a system that educates about 400,000 students each year. The most volatile current debate among American school administrators, teachers, parents, and students concerns high-stakes testing. The stakes are considered high because instead of simply testing their students to measure their progress, schools are increasingly being held accountable for the results. The federal government mandated high-stakes testing as part of the No Child Left Behind law signed by President Bush in 2002. But even before that law, most states gave annual standardized tests to students in elementary and secondary school. Twenty states rewarded individual schools for good test scores or dramatic improvement. Thirty-two states sanctioned the schools that didn't do well. The Chicago Public Schools system embraced high-stakes testing in 1996. Under the new policy, a school with low reading scores would be placed on probation and face the threat of being shut down, its staff to be dismissed or reassigned. The CPS also did away with what is known as social promotion. In the past, only a dramatically inept or difficult student was held back a grade. Now, in order to be promoted, every student in 3rd, 6th, and 8th grade had to manage a minimum score on the standardized multiple-choice exam known as the Iowa Test of Basic Skills. Advocates of high-stakes testing argue that it raises the standards of learning and gives students more incentive to study. Also, if the test prevents poor students from advancing without merit, they won't clog up the higher grades and slow down good students. Opponents, meanwhile, worry that certain students will be unfairly penalized if they don't happen to test well, and that teachers may concentrate on the test topics at the exclusion of more important lessons. Schoolchildren, of course, have had incentive to cheat for as long as there have been tests. But high-stakes testing has so radically changed the incentives for teachers that they, too, have added reason to cheat. With high-stakes testing, a teacher whose students test poorly can be punished or passed over for a raise or promotion. If the entire school does poorly, federal funding can be withheld. If the school is put on probation, the teacher stands to be fired. High-stakes testing also presents teachers with some positive incentives. If her students do well enough, she might find herself praised, promoted, and even richer. The state of California, at one point, introduced bonuses of $25,000 for teachers who produced big test score gains. And if a teacher were to survey this newly-incentivized landscape and consider somehow inflating her students' scores, she just might be persuaded by one final incentive. Teacher cheating is rarely looked for, hardly ever detected, and just about never punished. How might a teacher go about cheating? There are any number of possibilities, from the brazen to the sophisticated. A fifth-grade student in Oakland recently came home from school and gaily told her mother that her super-nice teacher had written the answers to the state exam right there on the chalkboard. Such instances are certainly rare, for placing your fate in the hands of 30 prepubescent witnesses doesn't seem like a risk that even the worst teacher would take. The Oakland teacher was duly fired. There are more subtle ways to inflate students' scores. A teacher can simply give students extra time to complete the test. If she obtains a copy of the exam early, that is, illegitimately, she can prepare them for specific questions. More broadly, she can teach to the test, basing her lesson plans on questions from past year's exams, which isn't considered cheating, but certainly violates the spirit of the test. Since these tests all have multiple-choice answers with no penalty for wrong guesses, a teacher might simply instruct her students to randomly fill in every blank as the clock is winding down, perhaps inserting a long string of Bs or an alternating pattern of Bs and Cs. She might even fill in the blanks for them after they've left the room. But if a teacher really wanted to cheat and make it worth her while, what she might do is collect her students' answer sheets and, in the hour or so before turning them in to be read by an electronic scanner, erase the wrong answers and fill in correct ones. And you always thought that number two pencil was for the children to change their answers. If this kind of teacher cheating is truly going on, how might it be detected? To catch a cheater, it helps to think like one. If you were willing to erase your students' wrong answers and fill in correct ones, you probably wouldn't want to change too many wrong answers. That would clearly be a tip-off. You probably wouldn't even want to change answers on every student's test, another tip-off. Nor, in all likelihood, would you have enough time because the answer sheets are turned in soon after the test is over. So what you might do is select a string of eight or ten consecutive answers and fill in the correct answers for maybe one-half or two-thirds of your students. You could easily memorize a short pattern of correct answers and it would be a lot faster to erase and change that pattern than to go through each student's answer sheet individually. You might even think to focus your activity toward the end of the test where the questions tend to be harder than the earlier questions. In that way, you'd be most likely to substitute correct answers for wrong ones. If economics is a science primarily concerned with incentives, it is also, fortunately, a science with statistical tools to measure how people respond to those incentives. All you need are some data. In this case, the Chicago Public School System obliged. It made available a database of the test answers for every CPS student from 3rd grade through 7th grade from 1993 to 2000. This amounts to roughly 30,000 students per grade per year, more than 700,000 sets of answers, and nearly 100 million individual answers. The data, organized by classroom, included each student's question-by-question answer strings for reading and math tests. The actual paper answer sheets were not included. They were habitually shredded soon after a test. The data also included some information about each teacher and demographic information for every student as well as his or her past and future test scores, which would prove a key element in detecting the teacher cheating. Now it was time to construct an algorithm that could tease some conclusions from this massive data. What might a cheating teacher's classroom look like? The first thing to search for would be unusual answer patterns in a given classroom, blocks of identical answers, for instance, especially among the harder questions. If ten very bright students, as indicated by their past and future test scores, gave correct answers to the exam's first five questions, which are typically the easiest ones, such an identical block shouldn't be considered suspicious. But if ten poor students gave correct answers to the last five questions on the exam, the hardest ones, that's worth looking into. Another red flag would be a strange pattern within any one student's exam, such as getting the hard questions right while missing the easy ones, especially when measured against the thousands of students in other classrooms who scored similarly on the same test. Furthermore, the algorithm would seek out a classroom full of students who performed far better than their past scores would have predicted and who then went on to score significantly lower the following year. A dramatic one-year spike in test scores might initially be attributed to a good teacher, but with a dramatic fall to follow, there's a strong likelihood that the spike was brought about by artificial means. In the print version of this book, you can see the answer strings from the students in two 6th grade Chicago classrooms who took the identical math test. Each horizontal row represents one student's answers. The letter A, B, C, or D indicates a correct answer. A number indicates a wrong answer, with 1 corresponding to A, 2 corresponding to B, and 3 corresponding to C.