the effect of imprisonment on crime rates. What you would ideally like to do is have a few randomly chosen states suddenly release 10,000 prisoners, while another few random states lock up an extra 10,000 people. In the absence of such a perfect experiment, you are forced to rely on creative proxies, like lawsuits that charge various states with prison overcrowding, which down the road lead to essentially random releases of large numbers of prisoners. And yes, crime in those states does rise sharply after the prisoners are released. What could be a more opportunistic means of generating data than exploiting your own body? Robert started small, with his acne, then moved on to his early waking. It took him more than 10 years of experimenting, but he found that his morning insomnia could be cured if, on the previous day, he got lots of morning light, skipped breakfast, and spent at least 8 hours standing. Stranger yet was the fix he discovered for lifting his mood, at least one hour each morning of TV viewing, specifically life-size talking heads, but never such TV at night. Once he stumbled upon this solution, Robert, like many scientists, looked back to the Stone Age for explication. Historical research suggests that early humans had lots of face-to-face contact every morning, but precious little after dark, a pattern that Robert's TV viewing now mimicked. It was also the Stone Age that informed his system of weight control. Over the years, he had tried a sushi diet, a tubular pasta diet, a 5 liters of water a day diet, and various others. They all proved ineffective or too hard or too boring to sustain. He had by now come to embrace the theory that our bodies are regulated by a set point, a sort of Stone Age thermostat that sets an optimal weight for each person. This thermostat, however, works opposite the one in your home. When your home gets cold, the thermostat turns on the furnace. But according to Robert's interpretation of the set point theory, when food is scarcer, you become less hungry, and you get hungrier when there's a lot of food around. This may sound backward, like telling your home's furnace to run only in the summer, but there is a key difference between home heat and calories. While there is no good way to store the warm air in your home for the next winter, there is a way to store today's calories for future use. It's called fat. In this regard, fat is like money. You can earn it today, put it in the bank, and withdraw it later when needed. During an era of scarcity, an era when the next meal depended on a successful hunt, not a successful phone call to Hunan Garden, this set point system was vital. It allowed you to spend down your fat savings when food was scarce, and make deposits when food was plentiful. Roberts was convinced that this system was accompanied by a powerful signaling mechanism. Whenever you ate a food that was flavorful, which correlated with a time of abundance, and familiar, which indicated that you had eaten this food before and benefited from it, your body demanded that you bank as many of those calories as possible. Roberts understood that these signals were learned associations, as dependable as Pavlov's bell, that once upon a time served humankind well. Today, however, at least in places with constant opportunities to eat, these signals can lead to a big fat problem, rampant overeating. So Roberts tried to game the Stone Age system. What if he could keep his thermostat low by sending fewer flavor signals? One obvious solution was a bland diet, but that didn't interest Roberts. He is, in fact, a serious foodie. After a great deal of experimenting, he discovered two agents capable of tricking the set point system. A few tablespoons of unflavored oil. He used canola or extra light olive oil. Swallowed a few times a day between meal times, often gave his body some calories, but didn't trip the signal to stock up on more. Several ounces of sugar water. He used granulated fructose, which has a lower glycemic index than table sugar, produced the same effect. Sweetness does not seem to act as a flavor in the body's caloric signaling system. The results were astounding. Roberts lost 40 pounds and never gained it back. He could eat pretty much whenever and whatever he wanted, but he was far less hungry than he had ever been. Friends and colleagues tried his diet, usually with similar results. His regimen seemed to satisfy a set of requirements that many commercial diets do not. It was easy, built on a scientific theory, and, most important, it did not leave Roberts hungry. In the academic community, Roberts' self-experimentation has found critics, but also serious admirers. Among the latter are the esteemed psychologist Robert Rosenthal, who has praised Roberts for approaching data in an exploratory spirit more than, or at least in addition to, a confirmatory spirit, and for seeing data analysis, in his words, as the opportunity to confront a surprise. Rosenthal went so far as to envision a time in the future when self-experimenter became a new part-time or full-time profession. But will Seth Roberts' strange weight control solution—he calls it the Shangri-La Diet—really work for the millions of people who need it? We may soon find out. With the Atkins Diet Company filing for bankruptcy, America is eager for its next diet craze, and a few spoonfuls of sugar may be just the kind of sacrifice that Americans can handle. Curbing Your Dog—Can Technology Keep New York City Scooped? From The New York Times Magazine, October 2, 2005 2,500 tons—that's how much manure was produced every day by the 200,000 horses that moved people and goods around New York City in the late 19th century. Much of the manure went uncollected, which posed a terrible problem. This is to say nothing of the horse urine, the deafening clatter of hooves, or the carcasses left to rot in the street. The manure was so widespread and smelly and unsanitary that brownstones were built with their entrances on the second floor so that homeowners might rise above it. Like so many seemingly overwhelming problems, this one was resolved—quite painlessly—by technology. The electric streetcar, and then the automobile, led to the disappearance of horses, and with them went their dung. Most of the animal dung produced in today's New York comes from our dogs. Estimates of the dog population vary widely, but one million is a good guess. All their poop doesn't just lie there, of course. In 1978, New York enacted its famous and widely imitated Pooper Scooper Law, and the city is plainly cleaner poop-wise than it was. But with a fine of just $50 for the first offense, the law doesn't provide much financial incentive to pick up after your dog. Nor does it seem to be vigorously enforced. Let's pretend that 99% of all dog owners do obey the law. That still leaves 10,000 dogs whose poop is left in public spaces each day. Over the last year, the city ticketed only 471 dog waste violations, which suggests that the typical offender stands a roughly 1 in 8,000 chance of getting a ticket. So here's a puzzle. Why do so many people pick up after their dogs? This would seem to be a case in which social incentives—the hard glare of a passerby and the offender's feelings of guilt—are at least as powerful as financial and legal incentives. If social forces get us most of the way there, how do we deal with the occasional miscreant who fails to scoop? After all, a walk through just about any New York neighborhood confirms that compliance with the law is hardly complete. The Parks Department, meanwhile, which conducts regular cleanliness checks of parks and playgrounds, says that dog poop accounts for 20% of its cleanliness failures. Dog poop is plainly far less of a nuisance than horse manure ever was. But if you are, say, a parent who walks two kids to school every day and tries to keep all three of you from experiencing that telltale soft smush of a misstep, it is a nuisance nonetheless. With horses, the solution was simply to eliminate them. Might there be a way to get rid of dog poop without getting rid of the dogs? It might help for a moment to think of a dog as if it were a gun. Using laws to eliminate guns has proved extremely difficult. A given gun lasts a very long time, and as with dogs, guns are widely loved. But getting rid of guns should never have been the point of gun control. The point, rather, ought to be getting rid of the misuse of guns—that is, the use of guns in crimes. Consequently, the most successful policies are those that directly punish misuse, like mandatory prison sentences, for any crime involving a gun. In California and elsewhere, such measures have substantially reduced gun crime. Similarly, the problem in New York is not so much with dogs per se, so perhaps attending to the real problem—their poop—will prompt a solution. Here's an idea. DNA sampling. During the licensing procedure, every dog will have to provide a sample of saliva or blood to establish a DNA file. Then, whenever a pile of poop is found on the sidewalk, a sample can be taken to establish the offender's DNA. Because stomachs and intestinal walls shed so many cells, poop is in fact a robust DNA source. During a murder trial in Indiana in 2002, the defendant was convicted in large part because the dog poop in his sneaker tread linked him to the scene of the crime. Once the fecal DNA is matched to a given dog's DNA file, the dog's owner will be mailed a ticket. It might cost about $30 million to establish a DNA sample for all the dogs of New York. If people stop violating the law, then New York has spent $30 million for cleaner streets. If not, the $30 million is seed money for a new revenue stream. Unfortunately, there's a big drawback to this plan. In order to match a pile of poop with its source, you will need to have every dog's DNA on file. And in 2003, the most recent year on record, only 102,004 dogs in New York were licensed. Even though a license is legally required, costs a mere $8.50 a year, and can be easily obtained by mail, most dog owners ignore the law and with good reason. Last year, only 68 summonses were issued in New York City for unlicensed dogs. So even if the DNA plan were enacted today, most offenders would still go unpunished. In fact, it stands to reason that the typical licensed dog is less likely to offend than the typical unlicensed dog, since the sort of owner who is responsible enough to license his dog is also most likely responsible enough to clean up after it. How then to get all of New York's dogs licensed? Instead of charging even a nominal fee, the city may want to pay people to license their dogs and then, instead of treating the licensing law as optional, enforce it for real. Setting up random street checks for dog licenses may offend some New Yorkers, but it certainly dovetails nicely with the Giuliani-era broken windows approach to low-level crime. Before you dismiss the entire dog DNA idea as idiotic, which frankly we were about to do the moment it popped into our heads, consider this. It turns out that civic leaders in Vienna and Dresden have recently floated the same idea. Indeed, one Vienna politician cited Mayor Giuliani as his inspiration. Closer to home, an eighth-grade girl in Hoboken, New Jersey, has also proposed the DNA solution. During a meeting last year of the Hoboken City Council, Lauren Mecca, the daughter of a police captain, argued her dog poop case. While adults like yourselves are appalled and disgusted by the sight of the uncollected dog poop that adorns our parks and sidewalks, it is children like myself and younger who run the greater risk of contact and exposure. We're the ones who ride our bikes, throw our balls, and roll our blades on the city's sidewalks. And we're the ones who have our picnics, stage our adventures, and carry out our dragon-slaying fantasies on our park's grassy lawns. The council, Mecca says today, didn't seem to take her proposal seriously. Why? They dismissed it basically because I was a 12-year-old kid. Why vote? There's no good economic rationale for going to the polls, so what is it that drives the democratic instinct? From the New York Times Magazine, November 6, 2005. Within the economics departments at certain universities, there's a famous but probably apocryphal story about two world-class economists who run into each other at the voting booth. What are you doing here? One asks. My wife made me come, the other says. The first economist gives a confirming nod. The same. After a mutually sheepish moment, one of them hatches a plan. If you promise never to tell anyone you saw me here, I'll never tell anyone I saw you. They shake hands, finish their polling business, and scurry off. Why would an economist be embarrassed to be seen at the voting booth? Because voting exacts a cost in time, effort, lost productivity, with no discernible payoff except perhaps some vague sense of having done your civic duty. As the economist Patricia Funk wrote in a recent paper, a rational individual should abstain from voting. The odds that your vote will actually affect the outcome of a given election are very, very, very slim. This was documented by the economists Casey Mulligan and Charles Hunter, who analyzed more than 56,000 congressional and state legislative elections since 1898. For all the attention paid in the media to close elections, it turns out that they are exceedingly rare. The median margin of victory in the congressional elections was 22%. In the state legislature elections, it was 25%. Even in the closest elections, it is almost never the case that a single vote is pivotal. Of the more than 40,000 elections for state legislator that Mulligan and Hunter analyzed, comprising nearly 1 billion votes, only seven elections were decided by a single vote with two others tied. Of the more than 16,000 congressional elections in which many more people vote, only one election in the past 100 years, a 1910 race in Buffalo, was decided by a single vote. But there is a more important point. The closer an election is, the more likely that its outcome will be taken out of the voters' hands, most vividly exemplified, of course, by the 2000 presidential race. It is true that the outcome of that election came down to a handful of voters, but their names were Kennedy, O'Connor, Rehnquist, Scalia, and Thomas. And it was only the votes they cast while wearing their robes that mattered, not the ones they may have cast in their home precincts. Still, people do continue to vote in the millions. Why? Here are three possibilities. One. Perhaps we are just not very bright and therefore wrongly believe that our votes will affect the outcome. Two. Perhaps we vote in the same spirit in which we buy lottery tickets. After all, your chances of winning a lottery and of affecting an election are pretty similar. From a financial perspective, playing the lottery is a bad investment, but it's fun and relatively cheap. For the price of a ticket, you buy the right to fantasize how you'd spend the winnings. Much as you get to fantasize that your vote will have some impact on policy. Three. Perhaps we've been socialized into the voting as civic duty idea, believing that it's a good thing for society if people vote, even if it's not particularly good for the individual, and thus we feel guilty for not voting. But wait a minute, you say. If everyone thought about voting the way economists do, we might have no elections at all. No voter goes to the polls actually believing that her single vote will affect the outcome, does she? And isn't it cruel to even suggest that her vote is not worth casting? This is indeed a slippery slope. The seemingly meaningless behavior of an individual, which, in aggregate, becomes quite meaningful. Here's a similar example in reverse. Imagine that you and your eight-year-old daughter are taking a walk through a botanical garden when she suddenly pulls a bright blossom off a tree. You shouldn't do that, you find yourself saying. Why not, she asks. Well, you say, because if everyone picked one, there wouldn't be any flowers left at all. Yeah, but everyone isn't picking them, she says with a look. Only me. In the old days, there were more pragmatic incentives to vote. Political parties regularly paid voters five or ten dollars to cast the proper ballot. Sometimes payment came in the form of a keg of whiskey, a barrel of flour, or in the case of an 1890 New Hampshire congressional race, a live pig. Now as then, many people worry about low voter turnout. Only slightly more than half of eligible voters participated in the last presidential election. But it might be more worthwhile to stand this problem on its head and instead ask a different question. Considering that an individual's vote almost never matters, why do so many people bother to vote at all? The answer may lie in Switzerland. That's where Patricia Funk discovered a wonderful natural experiment that allowed her to take an acute measure of voter behavior. The Swiss love to vote on parliamentary elections, on plebiscites, on whatever may arise. But voter participation had begun to slip over the years. Maybe they stopped handing out live pigs there too. So a new option was introduced, the mail-in ballot. Whereas each voter in the U.S. must register to vote, that isn't the case in Switzerland. Every eligible Swiss citizen began