So says physicist and educator Eric Mazur of Harvard. Why? As you get more expert in complex areas, your models in those areas grow more complex, and the component steps that compose them fade into the background of memory—the curse of knowledge. A physicist, for example, will create a mental library of the principles of physics she can use to solve the various kinds of problems she encounters in her work—Newton's laws of motion, for example, or the laws of conservation of momentum. She will tend to sort problems based on their underlying principles, whereas a novice will group them by similarity of surface features, like the apparatus being manipulated in the problem—pulley, inclined plane, etc. One day, when she goes to teach an intro physics class, she explains how a particular problem calls for something from Newtonian mechanics, forgetting that her students have yet to master the underlying steps she has long ago bundled into one unified mental model. This presumption by the professor that her students will readily follow something complex that appears fundamental in her own mind is a metacognitive error, a misjudgment of the matchup between what she knows and what her students know. Mazur says that the person who knows best what a student is struggling with in assimilating new concepts is not the professor, it's another student. This problem is illustrated through a very simple experiment in which one person plays a common tune inside her head and taps the rhythm with her knuckles, and another person, hearing the rhythmic taps, must guess the tune. Each tune comes from a fixed set of 25, so the statistical chance of guessing it is 4%. Tellingly, the participants who have the tune in mind estimate that the other person will guess correctly 50% of the time, but in fact the listeners guess correctly only 2.5% of the time, no better than chance. Like Coach Dooley's football players memorizing their playbooks, we all build mental libraries of myriad useful solutions that we can call on at will to help us work our way from one Saturday game to the next. But we can be tripped by these models too. When we fail to recognize a new problem that appears to be a familiar one is actually something quite different, and we pull out a solution to address it that doesn't work or makes things worse. The failure to recognize when your solution doesn't fit the problem is another form of faulty self-observation that can lead you into trouble. Mike Ebersold, the neurosurgeon, was called into the operating room one day to help a surgical resident who, in the midst of removing a brain tumor, was losing the patient. The usual model for cutting out a tumor calls for taking your time, working carefully around the growth, getting a clean margin, saving the surrounding nerves. But when the growth is in the brain, and if you get bleeding behind it, pressure on the brain can turn fatal. Instead of slow and careful, you need just the opposite, cutting the growth out very quickly so the blood can drain, and then working to repair the bleeding. Quote, Initially, you might be a little timid to take the big step, Mike says. It's not pretty, but the patient's survival depends on your knowing to switch gears and do it fast. Mike assisted, and the surgery was successful. Like the infant who calls the stranger Dada, we must cultivate the ability to discern when our mental models aren't working, when a situation that seems familiar is actually different and requires that we reach for a different solution and do something new. Unskilled and Unaware of It Incompetent people lack the skills to improve because they are unable to distinguish between incompetence and competence. This phenomenon of particular interest for metacognition has been named the Dunning-Kruger effect after the psychologists David Dunning and Justin Kruger. Their research showed that incompetent people overestimate their own competence and, failing to sense a mismatch between their performance and what is desirable, see no need to try to improve. The title of their initial paper on the topic was Unskilled and Unaware of It. Dunning and Kruger have also shown that incompetent people can be taught to raise their competence by learning the skills to judge their own performance more accurately—in short, to make their metacognition more accurate. In one series of studies that demonstrate this finding, they gave students a test of logic and asked them to rate their own performance. In the first experiment, the results confirmed expectations that the least competent students were the most out of touch with their performance. Students who scored at the 12th percentile, on average, believed that their general logical reasoning ability fell at the 68th percentile. In a second experiment, after taking an initial test and rating their own performance, the students were shown the other students' answers and then their own answers and asked to re-estimate the number of test questions they had answered correctly. The students whose performance was in the bottom quartile failed to judge their own performance more accurately after seeing the more competent choices of their peers and, in fact, tended to raise their already inflated estimates of their own ability. A third experiment explored whether poor performers could learn to improve their judgment. The students were given 10 problems in logical reasoning and, after the test, were asked to rate their logical reasoning skills and test performance. Once again, the students in the bottom quartile grossly overestimated their performance. Next, half the students received 10 minutes of training in logic, how to test the accuracy of a syllogism. The other half of the students were given an unrelated task. All the students were then asked to estimate again how well they had performed on the test. Now the students in the bottom quartile who had received the training were much more accurate estimators of the number of questions they got right and of how they performed compared to the other students. Those in the bottom quartile who didn't receive the training held to their mistaken conviction that they had performed well. How is it that incompetent people fail to learn through experience that they are unskilled? Dunning and Kruger offer several theories. One is that people seldom receive negative feedback about their skills and abilities from others in everyday life because people don't like to deliver the bad news. Even if people get negative feedback, they must come to an accurate understanding of why the failure occurred. For success, everything must go right, but by contrast, failure can be attributed to any number of external causes. It's easy to blame the tool for what the hand cannot do. Finally, Dunning and Kruger suggest that some people are just not astute at reading how other people are performing and are therefore less able to spot competence when they see it, making them less able to make comparative judgments of their own performance. These effects are more likely to occur in some contexts and with some skills than with others. In some domains, the revelation of one's incompetence can be brutally frank. The authors can all remember from their childhood when a teacher would appoint two boys to pick other kids for softball teams. The good players are picked first, the worst last. You learn your peers' judgments of your softball abilities in a very public manner, so it would be hard for the last picked player to think, I must be really good at softball. However, most realms of life do not render such stark judgments of ability. To sum up, the means by which we navigate the world, Daniel Kahneman's systems 1 and 2, rely on our perceptual systems, intuition, memory, and cognition, with all their ticks, warts, biases, and flaws. Each of us is an astounding bundle of perceptual and cognitive abilities, coexisting with the seeds of our own undoing. When it comes to learning, what we choose to do is guided by our judgments of what works and what doesn't, and we are easily misled. Our susceptibility to illusion and misjudgment should give us all pause, and especially so to the advocates of student-directed learning, a theory now current among some parents and educators. This theory holds that students know best what they need to study to master a subject and what pace and methods work best for them. For example, at Manhattan Free School in East Harlem, opened in 2008, students, quote, do not receive grades, take tests, or have to do anything they do not feel like doing. The Brooklyn Free School, which opened in 2004, along with a new crop of homeschooling families who call themselves unschoolers, follows the precept that whatever intrigues the learner is what will result in the best learning. The intent is laudatory. We know that students need to take more control of their own learning by employing strategies like those we have discussed. For example, they need to test themselves, both to attain the direct benefits of increased retention and to determine what they know and don't know to more accurately judge their progress and focus on material that needs more work. But few students practice these strategies, and those who do will need more than encouragement if they are to practice them effectively. It turns out that even when students understand that retrieval practice is a superior strategy, they often fail to persist long enough to get the lasting benefit. For example, when students are presented with a body of material to master, say, a stack of foreign vocabulary flashcards, and are free to decide when to drop a card out of the deck because they've learned it, most students drop the card when they've gotten it right once or twice, far sooner than they should. The paradox is that those students who employ the least effective study strategies overestimate their learning the most, and, as a consequence of their misplaced competence, they are not inclined to change their habits. The football player preparing for next Saturday's game doesn't leave his performance to intuition. He runs through his plays and mixes it up to discover the rough edges and work them out on the field well before suiting up for the big game. If this kind of behavior were anywhere close to the norm for students in their academics today, then self-directed learning would be highly effective. But of course, the football player is not self-directed. His practice is guided by a coach. Likewise, most students will learn academics better under an instructor who knows where improvement is needed and structures the practice required to achieve it. The answer to illusion and misjudgment is to replace subjective experience as the basis for decisions with a set of objective gauges outside ourselves so that our judgment squares with the real world around us. When we have reliable reference points, like cockpit instruments, and make a habit of checking them, we can make good decisions about where to focus our efforts, recognize when we've lost our bearings, and find our way back again. Here are some examples. Tools and Habits for Calibrating Your Judgment Most important is to make frequent use of testing and retrieval practice to verify what you really do know versus what you think you know. Conduct low-stakes quizzes in class, help the instructor verify that students are in fact learning as well as they appear to be, and reveal the areas where extra attention is needed. Doing cumulative quizzing, as Andy Sobel does in his political economics course, is especially powerful for consolidating learning and knitting the concepts from one stage of a course into new material encountered later. As a learner, you can use any number of practice techniques to self-test your mastery, from answering flashcards to explaining key concepts in your own words, and to peer instruction. Don't make the mistake of dropping material from your testing regime once you've gotten it correct a couple of times. If it's important, it needs to be practiced and practiced again. And don't put stock in momentary gains that result from massed practice. Increase your testing, vary your practice, keep the long view. Peer instruction, a learning model developed by Eric Mazur, incorporates many of the foregoing principles. The material to be covered in class is assigned for reading beforehand. In class, the lecture is interspersed with quick tests that present students with a conceptual question and give them a minute or two to grapple with it. They then try in small groups to reach a consensus on the correct answer. In Mazur's experience, this process engages the students in the underlying concepts of the lecture material, reveals students' problems in reaching understanding, and provides opportunities for them to explain their understanding, receive feedback, and assess their learning compared to other students. Likewise, the process serves as a gauge for the instructor of how well the students are assimilating the material and in what areas more or less work is needed. Mazur tries to pair students who initially had different answers to a question so that they can see another point of view and try to convince one another of who is right. For two more examples of this technique, see the profiles of the professors Mary Pat Wenderoth and Michael D. Matthews in Chapter 8. Pay attention to the cues you're using to judge what you have learned. Whether something feels familiar or fluent is not always a reliable indicator of learning. Neither is your level of ease in retrieving a fact or a phrase on a quiz shortly after encountering it in a lecture or text. Ease of retrieval after a delay, however, is a good indicator of learning. Far better is to create a mental model of the material that integrates the various ideas across a text, connects them to what you already know, and enables you to draw inferences. How ably you can explain a text is an excellent cue for judging comprehension because you must recall the salient points from memory, put them into your own words, and explain why they are significant, how they relate to the larger subject. Teachers should give corrective feedback, and learners should seek it. In his interview with Errol Morris, the psychologist David Dunning argues that the path to self-insight leads through other people. So it really depends on what sort of feedback you are getting. Is the world telling you good things? Is the world rewarding you in a way that you would expect a competent person to be rewarded? If you watch other people, you often find there are different ways to do things. There are better ways to do things. I'm not as good as I thought I was, but I have something to work on." Think of the kids lining up to join the softball team. Would you be picked? In many fields, the practice of peer review serves as an external gauge, providing feedback on one's performance. Most medical practice groups have morbidity-mortality conferences, and if a doctor has a bad patient outcome, it will be presented there. The other doctors will pick it apart or say, you did a good job, it was just a bad situation. Mike Ebersold argues that people in his field should practice as part of a group. If there are other neurosurgeons around you, it's a safeguard. If you are doing something that's not acceptable, they'll call you to task for it. In many settings, your judgment and learning are calibrated by working alongside a more experienced partner. Airline first officers with captains, rookies with seasoned cops, residents with experienced surgeons. The apprentice model is a very old one in human experience, as novices, whether cobblers or attorneys, have traditionally learned their craft from experienced practitioners. In other settings, teams are formed of people with complementary areas of expertise. When doctors implant medical devices like pacemakers and neurostimulators of the type that treat incontinence or the symptoms of Parkinson's disease, the manufacturer has a product representative right in the operating room with the surgeon. The rep has seen many surgeries using the device, knows the kinds of patients that will benefit from it, knows the contraindications and adverse events, and has a hotline to the engineers and clinicians on the company staff. The rep tracks the surgery to make sure the device is implanted in the correct position, the leads are inserted to the correct depth, and so on. Every part of the team benefits. The patient is assured of an appropriate and successful surgery. The doctor gets product and troubleshooting expertise at her fingertips, and the company makes sure its products are used correctly. Training that simulates the kinds of demands and changeable conditions that can be expected in real-world settings helps learners and trainers assess mastery and focus on areas where understanding or competency need to be raised. Take police work, where many different forms of simulation are used in training. For firearms training, it's often video-based scenarios, with a large screen set up at one end of a room where a number of props have been placed to imitate the situation confronting the officer, who enters the scene armed with a gun that has been modified to interact with the video. Lt. Katherine Johnson of the Minneapolis Police Department describes a couple of such simulations in which she has trained. One was a traffic stop. The training room had the