boosted final test performance by a remarkable 215 percent, actually impeded performance during initial learning. Now suppose you're a trainer in a company, trying to teach employees a complicated new process that involves 10 procedures. The typical way of doing this is to train up in procedure 1, repeating it many times until the trainees really seem to have it down cold. Then you go to procedure 2. You do many repetitions of 2, you get that down, and so on. That appears to produce fast learning. What would interleaved practice look like? You practice procedure 1 just a few times, then switch to procedure 4, then switch to 3, then to 7, and so on. Chapter 8 tells how Farmer's Insurance trains new agents in a spiraling series of exercises that cycle back to key skill sets in a seemingly random sequence that adds layers of context and meaning at each turn. The learning from interleaved practice feels slower than learning from massed practice. Teachers and students sense the difference. They can see that their grasp of each element is coming more slowly, and the compensating long-term advantage is not apparent to them. As a result, interleaving is unpopular and seldom used. Teachers dislike it because it feels sluggish. Students find it confusing. They're just starting to get a handle on new material and don't feel on top of it yet when they are forced to switch. But the research shows unequivocally that mastery and long-term retention are much better if you interleave practice than if you mass it. Varied Practice Okay, what about the beanbag study where the kids who did best had never practiced the three-foot toss that the other kids had only practiced? The beanbag study focused on mastery of motor skills, but much evidence has shown that the underlying principle applies to cognitive learning as well. The basic idea is that varied practice, like tossing your beanbags into baskets at mixed distances, improves your ability to transfer learning from one situation and apply it successfully to another. You develop a broader understanding of the relationships between different conditions and the movements required to succeed in them. You discern context better and develop a more flexible movement vocabulary, different movements for different situations. Whether the scope of variable training, e.g., the two- and four-foot tosses, must encompass the particular task, the three-foot toss, is subject for further study. The evidence favoring variable training has been supported by recent neuroimaging studies that suggest that different kinds of practice engage different parts of the brain. The learning of motor skills from varied practice, which is more cognitively challenging than massed practice, appears to be consolidated in an area of the brain associated with the more difficult process of learning higher-order motor skills. The learning of motor skills from massed practice, on the other hand, appears to be consolidated in a different area of the brain that is used for learning more cognitively simple and less challenging motor skills. The inference is that learning gained through the less challenging massed form of practice is encoded in a simpler or comparatively impoverished representation than the learning gained from the varied and more challenging practice, which demands more brain power and encodes the learning in a more flexible representation that can be applied more broadly. Among athletes, massed practice has long been the rule. Take your hook shot, knock the 20-foot putt, work your backhand return, throw the pass while rolling out, again and again and again, to get it right and train your muscle memory. Or so the notion holds. The benefits of variable training for motor learning have been gaining broader acceptance, albeit slowly. Consider the one-touch pass in hockey. That's where you receive the puck and immediately pass it to a teammate who's moving down the ice, keeping the opposition off balance and unable to put pressure on the puck carrier. Jamie Kompon, when he was assistant coach of the Los Angeles Kings, was in the habit of running team practice on one-touch passes from the same position on the rink. Even if this move is interleaved with a sequence of other moves in practice, if you only do it at the same place on the rink or in the same sequence of moves, you are only, as it were, throwing your beanbags into the three-foot bucket. Kompon is on to the difference now and has changed up his drills. Once we talked, he's gone over to the Chicago Blackhawks. We would have said, keep an eye on those Blackhawks here. But as we revised to go into production, Kompon and team have already won the Stanley Cup. Perhaps no coincidence? The benefits of variable practice for cognitive as opposed to motor skills learning were shown in a recent experiment that adapted the beanbag test to verbal learning. In this case, the students solved anagrams, that is, they rearranged letters to form words. T-M-O-C-E becomes comet. Some subjects practiced the same anagram over and over, whereas others practiced multiple anagrams for the word. When they were all tested on the same anagram that the former group had practiced on, the latter group performed better on it. The same benefits will apply whether you are practicing to identify tree species, differentiate the principles of case law, or master a new computer program. Developing Discrimination Skills Compared to masked practice, a significant advantage of interleaving and variation is that they help us learn better how to assess context and discriminate between problems, selecting and applying the correct solution from a range of possibilities. In math education, massing is embedded in the textbook. Each chapter is dedicated to a particular kind of problem, which you study in class and then practice by working, say, 20 examples for homework before you move on. The next chapter has a different type of problem, and you dive into the same kind of concentrated learning and practice of that solution. Then you march, chapter by chapter, through the semester. But then, on the final exam, lo and behold, the problems are all mixed up. You're staring at each one in turn, asking yourself, which algorithm do I use? Was it in chapter 5, 6, or 7? When you have learned under conditions of masked or blocked repetition, you have had no practice on that critical sorting process. But this is the way life usually unfolds. Problems and opportunities come at us unpredictably, out of sequence. For our learning to have practical value, we must be adept at discerning what kind of problem is this, so we can select and apply an appropriate solution. Several studies have demonstrated the improved powers of discrimination to be gained through interleaved and varied practice. One study involved learning to attribute paintings to the artists who created them, and another focused on learning to identify and classify birds. Researchers initially predicted that masked practice in identifying painters' works, that is, studying many examples of one painter's works before moving on to study many examples of another's works, would best help students learn the defining characteristics of each artist's style. Masked practice of each artist's works, one artist at a time, would better enable students to match artworks to artists later, compared to interleaved exposure to the works of different artists. The idea was that interleaving would be too hard and confusing. Students would never be able to sort out the relevant dimensions. The researchers were wrong. The commonalities among one painter's works that the students learned through masked practice proved less useful than the differences between the works of multiple painters that the students learned through interleaving. Interleaving enabled better discrimination and produced better scores on a later test that required matching the works with their painters. The interleaving group was also better able to match painters' names correctly to new examples of their work that the group had never viewed during the learning phase. Despite these results, students who participated in these experiments persisted in preferring masked practice, convinced that it served them better. Even after they took the test and could have realized from their own performance that interleaving was the better strategy for learning, they clung to their belief that the concentrated viewing of paintings by one artist was better. The myths of masked practice are hard to exercise, even when you're experiencing the evidence yourself. The power of interleaving practice to improve discriminability has been reaffirmed in studies of people learning bird classification. The challenge here is more complex than it might seem. One study addressed 20 different bird families—thrashers, swallows, wrens, finches, and so on. Within each family, students were presented with a dozen species—brown thrasher, curve-billed thrasher, bender's thrasher, etc. To identify a bird's family, you consider a wide range of traits like size, plumage, behavior, location, beak shape, iris color, and so on. A problem in bird identification is that members of a family share many traits in common but not all. For instance, many but not all thrashers have a long, slightly hooked beak. There are traits that are typical of a family but none that occur in all members of that family and can serve as unique identifiers. Because rules for classification can only rely on these characteristic traits rather than on defining traits—ones that hold for every member—bird classification is a matter of learning concepts and making judgments, not simply memorizing features. Massed and variable practice prove more helpful than massed practice for learning the underlying concepts that unite and differentiate the species and families. To paraphrase a conclusion from one of these studies, recall and recognition require factual knowledge considered to be a lower level of learning than conceptual knowledge. Conceptual knowledge requires an understanding of the interrelationships of the basic elements within a larger structure that enable them to function together. Conceptual knowledge is required for classification. Following this logic, some people argue that practicing retrieval of facts and exemplars would fall short as a strategy for comprehending general characteristics that are required for higher levels of intellectual behavior. The bird classification studies suggest the opposite. Studies of learning that help students identify and discern complex prototypes—family resemblances—can help them grasp the kinds of contextual and functional differences that go beyond the acquisition of simple forms of knowledge and reach into the higher sphere of comprehension. Improving Complex Mastery for Medical Students The distinction between straightforward knowledge of facts and deeper learning that permits flexible use of the knowledge may be a little fuzzy, but it resonates with Douglas Larson at Washington University Medical School in St. Louis, who says that the skills required for bird classification are similar to those required of a doctor diagnosing what's wrong with a patient. Quote, The reason variety is important is it helps us see more nuances in the things that we can compare against, he says. That comes up a lot in medicine, in the sense that every patient visit is a test. There are many layers of explicit and implicit memory involved in the ability to discriminate between symptoms and their interrelationships, unquote. Implicit memory is your automatic retrieval of past experience in interpreting a new one. For example, the patient comes in and gives you a story. As you listen, you are consciously thinking through your mental library to see what fits, while also unconsciously polling your past experiences to help interpret what the patient is telling you. Then you're left with making a judgment call, Larson says. Larson is a pediatric neurologist, seeing patients in the university clinic and hospital. He's a busy guy. In addition to practicing medicine, he supervises the work of physicians in training, he teaches, and as time permits, he conducts research into medical education, working in collaboration with cognitive psychologists. He's drawing on all of these roles to redesign and strengthen the school's training curriculum in pediatric neurology. As you'd expect, the medical school employs a wide spectrum of instructional techniques. Besides classroom lectures and labs, students practice resuscitations and other procedures on high-tech mannequins in three simulation centers the school maintains. Each patient is hooked up to monitors, has a heartbeat, blood pressure, pupils that dilate and constrict, and the ability to listen and speak thanks to a controller who observes and operates the mannequin from a back room. The school also makes use of standardized patients, actors who follow scripts and exhibit symptoms the students are required to diagnose. The center is set up like a regular medical clinic, and students must show proficiency in all aspects of a patient encounter, from bedside manner, physical exam skills, and remembering to ask the full spectrum of pertinent questions, to arriving at a diagnosis and treatment plan. From studies of these teaching methods, Larson has drawn some interesting conclusions. First, and this may seem self-evident, you do better on a test to demonstrate your competency at seeing patients in a clinic if your learning experience has involved seeing patients in a clinic. Simply reading about patients is not enough. However, on written final exams, medical students who have examined patients and those who have learned via written tests do equally well. The reason is that in a written test, the student is being given considerable structure and being asked for specific information. When examining the patient, you have to come up on your own with the right mental model and the steps to follow. Having practiced these steps on patients or simulated patients improves performance relative to just reading about how to do it. In other words, the kind of retrieval practice that proves most effective is one that reflects what you'll be doing with the knowledge later. It's not just what you know, but how you practice what you know that determines how well the learning serves you later. As the sports adage goes, practice like you play and you will play like you practice. This conclusion lines up with other research into learning and with some of the more sophisticated training practices in science and industry, including the increasingly broad use of simulators not just for jet pilots and medical students, but for cops, towboat pilots, and people in almost any field you can name that requires mastery of complex knowledge and skills and where the stakes for getting it right are high. Book learning is not enough in these cases. Actual hands-on practice is needed. Second, while it is important for a medical student to build breadth by seeing a wide variety of patients manifesting different diseases, placing too much emphasis on variety runs the risk of under-emphasizing repeated retrieval practice on the basics, on the typical way the disease presents itself in most patients. Quote, there's a certain set of diseases that we want you to know very well, Larson says, so we're going to have you see these standardized patients again and again and assess your performance until you really have that down and can show us, I really do that well. It's not either or, variety versus repetition. We need to make sure we're appropriately balanced and also recognize that we sometimes fall into the trap of familiarity. I've already seen a bunch of patients with this problem, I don't need to keep seeing them. But really, repeated retrieval practice is crucial to long-term retention, and it's a critical aspect of training, unquote. A third critical aspect is practical experience. For a doctor, seeing patients provides a natural cycle of spaced retrieval, practice, interleaving, and variety. Quote, so much of medicine is based on learning by experience, which is why, after the first two years, we take students out of the classroom and start putting them into clinical settings. A huge question is, what is it about learning and experience that come together? We have lots of experiences we don't learn from. What differentiates those that teach us something, unquote? One form of practice that helps us learn from experience, as the neurosurgeon Mike Ebersold recounted in Chapter 2, is reflection. Some people are more given to the act of reflection than others, so Doug Larson has broadened his research to study how you might structure reflection as an integral part of the training, helping students cultivate it as a habit. He's experimenting with requiring students to write daily or weekly summaries of what they did, how it worked, and what they might do differently next time to get better results. He speculates that daily reflection, as a form of spaced retrieval practice, is probably as critical in the real-world application of medicine as quizzing and testing are in building competencies in medical school. What about the classroom lecture or the typical in-service training conference that's compressed over a couple of days? Larson figures his school's interns spend 10% of their time sitting in conferences listening to lectures. It may be a talk on metabolic diseases, on different infectious diseases, or on different drugs. The speaker puts the PowerPoint slideshow up and starts going through it. Usually, there's lunch, and the docs eat, listen, and leave. In my mind, considering how much forgetting occurs, it's very discouraging that we're putting so many resources into an activity that, the way it is currently done, learning research tells us is so ineffective. Medical students and residents go to these conferences, and they have no repeated exposure whatsoever.