Learning and memory strategies, such as retrieval practice and the building of mental models, are effective for enhancing intellectual abilities in the material or skills practiced, but the benefits don't extend to mastery of other material or skills. Studies of the brains of experts show enhanced myelination of the axons related to the area of expertise, but not elsewhere in the brain. Enhanced myelination changes in piano virtuosos are specific to piano virtuosity, but the ability to make practice a habit is generalizable. To the extent that brain training improves one's efficacy and self-confidence, as the purveyors claim, the benefits are more likely the fruits of better habits, such as learning how to focus attention and persist at practice. Richard Nisbet writes of environmental, quote, multipliers that can deliver a disproportionate effect from a small genetic predisposition. The kid who is genetically just a little bit more curious becomes significantly smarter if she's in an environment that feeds curiosity. Now stand that notion on its head. Since it's unlikely I'll be raising my IQ anytime soon, are there strategies or behaviors that can serve as cognitive multipliers to amp up the performance of the intelligence I've already got? Yes, here are three. Embracing a growth mindset, practicing like an expert, and constructing memory cues. Growth Mindset Let's return to the old saw, quote, if you think you can or you think you can't, you're right. It turns out there's more truth here than wit. Attitude counts for a lot. The studies of the psychologist Carol Dweck have gotten huge attention for showing just how big an impact one simple conviction can have on learning and performance. The belief that your level of intellectual ability is not fixed, but rests to a large degree in your own hands. Dweck and her colleagues have replicated and expanded on their results in many studies. In one of the early experiments, she ran a workshop for low-performing seventh graders at a New York City junior high school, teaching them about the brain and about effective study techniques. Half the group also received a presentation on memory, but the other half were given an explanation of how the brain changes as a result of effortful learning. That when you try hard and learn something new, the brain forms new connections, and these new connections, over time, make you smarter. This group was told that intellectual development is not the natural unfolding of intelligence, but results from the new connections that are formed through effort and learning. After the workshop, both groups of kids filtered back into their classwork. Their teachers were unaware that some had been taught that effortful learning changes the brain, but as the school year unfolded, those students adopted what Dweck calls a quote, growth mindset, a belief that their intelligence was largely within their own control, and they went on to become much more aggressive learners and higher achievers than students from the first group, who continued to hold the conventional view, what Dweck calls a quote, fixed mindset, that their intellectual ability was set at birth by the natural talents they were born with. Dweck's research had been triggered by her curiosity over why some people become helpless when they encounter challenges and fail at them, whereas others respond to failure by trying new strategies and redoubling their effort. She found that a fundamental difference between the two responses lies in how a person attributes failure. Those who attribute failure to their own inability, quote, I'm not intelligent, become helpless. Those who interpret failure as the result of insufficient effort or an ineffective strategy dig deeper and try different approaches. Dweck came to see that some students aim at performance goals, while others strive toward learning goals. In the first case, you're working to validate your ability. In the second, you're working to acquire new knowledge or skills. People with performance goals unconsciously limit their potential. If your focus is on validating or showing off your ability, you pick challenges you are confident you can meet. You want to look smart, so you do the same stunt over and over again. But if your goal is to increase your ability, you pick ever-increasing challenges, and you interpret setbacks as useful information that helps you sharpen your focus, get more creative and work harder. Quote, if you want to demonstrate something over and over, ability feels like something static that lies inside of you, whereas if you want to increase your ability, it feels dynamic and malleable, Dweck says. Learning goals trigger entirely different chains of thought and action from performance goals. Paradoxically, a focus on performance trips up some star athletes. Praised for being, quote, naturals, they believe their performance is a result of innate gifts. If they're naturals, the idea goes, they shouldn't have to work as hard to excel. And in fact, many simply avoid practicing because the need to practice is public evidence that their natural gifts are not good enough to cut the mustard after all. A focus on performance instead of on learning and growing causes people to hold back from risk-taking or exposing their self-image to ridicule by putting themselves into situations where they have to break a sweat to deliver the critical outcome. Dweck's work has extended into the realm of praise and the power it has in shaping the way people respond to challenges. Here's an example. A group of fifth grade students are individually given a puzzle to solve. Some of the students who solve the puzzle are praised for being smart. Other students who solve it are praised for having worked hard. The students are then invited to choose another puzzle, either one of similar difficulty or one that's harder, but that they would learn from by making the effort to try solving. A majority of the students who are praised for their smarts pick the easier puzzle. Ninety percent of the kids praised for effort pick the harder one. In a twist on this study, students get puzzles from two people, Tom and Bill. The puzzles Tom gives the students can be solved with effort, but the ones Bill gives them cannot be solved. Every student gets puzzles from both Tom and Bill. After working to solve the puzzles, some of the kids are praised for being smart and some for their effort. In a second round, the kids get more puzzles from both Tom and Bill, and this time all the puzzles are solvable. Here's the surprise. Of the students who were praised for being smart, few solved the puzzles they got from Bill, even though they were the same puzzles these students had solved earlier when they got them from Tom. For those who saw being considered smart as paramount, their failure to solve Bill's puzzles in the first round instilled a sense of defeat and helplessness. When you praise for intelligence, kids get the message that being seen as smart is the name of the game. Emphasizing effort gives a child a rare variable they can control, Dweck says. But, quote, emphasizing natural intelligence takes it out of a child's control, and it provides no good recipe for responding to a failure, end quote. Paul Tuff, in his recent book, How Children Succeed, draws on Dweck's work and others to make the case that our success is less dependent on IQ than on grit, curiosity, and persistence. The essential ingredient is encountering adversity in childhood and learning to overcome it. Tuff writes that children in the lowest strata of society are so beset by challenges and starved of resources that they don't stand a chance of experiencing success. But, and here's another paradox, kids at the top of the heap who are raised in cosseted settings, praised for being smart, bailed out of predicaments by helicopter parents, and never allowed to fail or overcome adversity on their own initiative, are also denied the character-building experiences essential for success later in life. A kid who's born on third base and grows up thinking she hit a triple is unlikely to embrace the challenges that will enable her to discover her full potential. A focus on looking smart keeps a person from taking risks in life, the small ones that help people rise toward their aspirations, as well as the bold, visionary moves that lead to greatness. Failure, as Carol Dweck tells us, gives you useful information and the opportunity to discover what you're capable of doing when you really set your mind to it. The takeaway from Dweck, Tuff, and their colleagues working in this field is that, more than IQ, it's discipline, grit, and a growth mindset that imbue a person with the sense of possibility and the creativity and persistence needed for higher learning and success. Study skills and learning skills are inert until they're powered by an active ingredient, Dweck says. The active ingredient is the simple but nonetheless profound realization that the power to increase your abilities lies largely within your own control. Deliberate Practice When you see stellar performances by an expert in any field, a pianist, chess player, golfer, perhaps you marvel at what natural talent must underlie their abilities. But expert performance does not usually rise out of some genetic predisposition or IQ advantage. It rises from thousands of hours of what Anders Erikson calls sustained deliberate practice. If doing something repeatedly might be considered practice, deliberate practice is a different animal. It's goal-directed, often solitary, and consists of repeated striving to reach beyond your current level of performance. Whatever the field, expert performance is thought to be garnered through the slow acquisition of a larger number of increasingly complex patterns—patterns that are used to store knowledge about which actions to take in a vast vocabulary of different situations. Witness a Champion Chess Player In studying the positions on a board, he can contemplate many alternative moves and the countless different directions each might precipitate. The striving, failure, problem-solving, and renewed attempts that characterize deliberate practice build the new knowledge, physiological adaptations, and complex mental models required to attain ever-higher levels. When Michelangelo finally completed painting over 400 life-size figures on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, he is reported to have written, quote, "'If people knew how hard I worked to get my mastery, it wouldn't seem so wonderful after all,' unquote. What appeared to his admirers to have flowed from sheer genius had required four torturous years of work and dedication." Deliberate practice usually isn't enjoyable, and for most learners it requires a coach or trainer who can help identify areas of performance that need to be improved, help focus attention on specific aspects, and provide feedback to keep perception and judgment accurate. The effort and persistence of deliberate practice remodel the brain and physiology to accommodate higher performance, but achieving expertise in any field is particular to the field. It does not confer some kind of advantage or head start toward gaining expertise in another domain. A simple example of practice remodeling the brain is the treatment of focal hand dystonia, a syndrome affecting some guitarists and pianists whose repetitive playing has rewired their brains to think that two fingers have been fused into one. Through a series of challenging exercises, they can be helped gradually to retrain their fingers to move separately. One reason that experts are sometimes perceived to possess an uncanny talent is that some can observe a complex performance in their field and later reconstruct from memory every aspect of that performance in granular detail. Mozart was famous for being able to reconstruct complex musical scores after a single hearing. But this skill, Erikson says, rises not out of some sixth sense but from an expert's superior perception and memory within his domain, which are the result of years of acquired skill and knowledge in that domain. Most people who achieve expertise in a field are destined to remain average performers in the other realms of life. Ten thousand hours, or ten years of practice, was the average time the people Erikson studied had invested to become experts in their field, and the best among them had spent the larger percentage of those hours in solitary, deliberate practice. The central idea here is that expert performance is a product of the quantity and the quality of practice, not of genetic predisposition, and that becoming expert is not beyond the reach of normally gifted people who have the motivation, time, and discipline to pursue it. Memory Cues Mnemonic devices, as we mentioned, are mental tools to help hold material in memory, cued for ready recall. Mnemosyne, one of the nine muses of Greek mythology, was the goddess of memory. Some examples of simple mnemonic devices are acronyms like ROYGBIV, for the colors of the rainbow, and reverse acronyms as in IVALUXYLOPHONES, like cows dig milk, for the ascending value of Roman numerals from one to a thousand, e.g. V equals five, D equals five hundred. A memory palace is a more complex type of mnemonic device that is useful for organizing and holding larger volumes of material in memory. It is based on the method of loci, which goes back to the ancient Greeks and involves associating mental images with a series of physical locations to help cue memories. For example, you imagine yourself within a space that is very familiar to you, like your home, and then you associate prominent features of the space, like your easy chair, with a visual image of something you want to remember. When you think of your easy chair, you may picture a limber yogi sitting there, to remind you to renew your yoga lessons. The features of your home can be associated with a countless number of visual cues for retrieving memories later, when you simply take an imaginary walk through the house. If it's important to recall the material in a certain order, the cues can be sequenced along the route through your house. The method of loci is also used to associate cues with features you encounter along a very familiar journey, like your walk to the corner store. As we write this passage, a group of students in Oxford, England, are constructing memory palaces to prepare for their A-level exams in psychology. Every week, for six weeks, they and their instructor have visited a different cafe in town, where they have relaxed over coffee, familiarized themselves with the layout of the place, and discussed how they might imagine it occupied with vivid characters who will cue from memory important aspects of psychology that they will need to write about at exam time. We'll come back to these students, but first, a few more words about this technique, which is surprisingly effective and derives from the way imagery serves to contribute vividness and connective links to memory. Humans remember pictures more easily than words. For example, the image of an elephant is easier to recall than the word elephant. So it stands to reason that associating vivid mental images with verbal or abstract material makes that material easier to retrieve from memory. A strong mental image can prove as secure and bountiful as a loaded stringer of fish. Tug on it, and the whole day's catch comes to the surface. When a friend is reminding you of a conversation with somebody the two of you met on a trip, you struggle to recall it. She tells you where the discussion happened, and you picture the place. Ah, yes, it all comes flooding back. Images cue memories. Craig Twain wrote about his personal experiences with this phenomenon in an article published by Harper's. In his days on the speaking circuit, Twain used a list of partial sentences to prompt himself through the different phases of his remarks, but he found the system unsatisfactory. When you glance at snippets of text, they all look alike. He experimented with alternatives, finally hitting on the idea of outlining his speech in a series of crude pencil sketches. The sketches did the job. A haystack with a snake under it told him where to start his story about his adventures in Nevada's Carson Valley. An umbrella tilted against a stiff wind took him to the next part of his story, the fierce winds that blew down out of the Sierras at about two o'clock every afternoon, and so on. The power of these sketches to evoke memory impressed Twain and gave rise one day to an idea for helping his children, who were still struggling to learn the kings and queens of England, despite long hours invested by their nanny in trying to hammer the names and dates into them through brute repetition. It dawned on Twain to try visualizing the successive rains. Quote, We were at the farm then. From the house porch the ground sloped gradually down to the lower fence and rose on the right to the high ground where my small work den stood. A carriage road wound through the grounds and up the hill. I staked it out with the English monarchs, beginning with William the Conqueror, and you could stand on the porch and clearly see every rain and its length from the conquest down to Victoria. Then in the forty-sixth year of her reign, eight hundred and seventeen years of English history.