in the boardroom. Even if we shared Bruce Hendry's desire and determination, even if we took his pointers to heart, how many of us would learn the art of knowing which pile had a pony in it? As the story of Bruce makes clear, some learning differences matter more than others. But which differences? That's what we'll explore in the rest of this chapter. One difference that appears to matter a lot is how you see yourself and your abilities. As the maxim goes, whether you think you can or you think you can't, you're right. The work of Carol Dweck, described in chapter 7, goes a long way toward validating this sentiment. So does a Fortune article of a few years ago that tells of a seeming contradiction. The stories of people with dyslexia who have become high achievers in business and other fields, despite their learning disabilities. Richard Branson of Virgin Records and Virgin Atlantic Airways quit school at 16 to start and run businesses now worth billions. Diane Swank is one of the top economic forecasters in the United States. Craig McCaw is a pioneer of the cellular phone industry. Paul Orfalea founded Kinko's. These achievers and others, when asked, told their stories of overcoming adversity. All had trouble in school and with the accepted methods of learning. Most were mislabeled low IQ. Some were held back or shunted into classes for the mentally retarded. And nearly all were supported by parents, tutors, and mentors who believed in them. Branson recalled, quote, at some point I think I decided that being dyslexic was better than being stupid. There, in a phrase, Branson's personal narrative of exceptionalism. The stories we create to understand ourselves become the narratives of our lives, explaining the accidents and choices that have brought us where we are, what I'm good at, what I care about most, and where I'm headed. If you are among the last kids standing on the sidelines as the softball teams are chosen up, the way you understand your place in the world likely changes a little, shaping your sense of ability and the subsequent paths you take. What you tell yourself about your ability plays a part in shaping the ways you learn and perform, how hard you apply yourself, for example, or your tolerance for risk-taking and your willingness to persevere in the face of difficulty. But differences in skills and your ability to convert new knowledge into building blocks for further learning also shape your routes to success. Your finesse at softball, for example, depends on a constellation of different skills, like your ability to hit the ball, run the bases, and field and throw the ball. Moreover, skill on the playing field is not a prerequisite for becoming a star in the sport in a different capacity. Many of the best managers and coaches in pro sports were mediocre or poor players, but happened to be exceptional students of their games. Although Tony LaRussa's career as a baseball player was short and undistinguished, he went on to manage ball teams with remarkable success. When he retired, having chalked up six American and National League championships and three World Series titles, he was hailed as one of the greatest managers of all time. Each of us has a large basket of resources in the form of aptitudes, prior knowledge, intelligence, interests, and sense of personal empowerment that shape how we learn and how we overcome our shortcomings. Some of these differences matter a lot. For example, our ability to abstract underlying principles from new experiences and to convert new knowledge into mental structures. Other differences we may think count for a lot, for example, having a verbal or visual learning style, actually don't. On any list of differences that matter most for learning, the level of language fluency and reading ability will be at or near the top. While some kinds of difficulties that require increased cognitive effort can strengthen learning, not all difficulties we face have that effect. If the additional effort required to overcome the deficit does not contribute to more robust learning, it's not desirable. An example is the poor reader who cannot hold on to the thread of a text while deciphering individual words in a sentence. This is the case with dyslexia, and while dyslexia is not the only cause of reading difficulties, it is one of the most common, estimated to affect some 15% of the population. It results from anomalous neural development during pregnancy that interferes with the ability to read by disrupting the brain's capacity to link letters to the sounds they make, which is essential for word recognition. People don't get over dyslexia, but with help they can learn to work with and around the problems it poses. The most successful programs emphasize practice at manipulating phonemes, building vocabulary, increasing comprehension, and improving fluency of reading. Neurologists and psychologists emphasize the importance of diagnosing dyslexia early and working with children before the third grade while the brain is still quite plastic and potentially more malleable, enabling the rerouting of neural circuits. Dyslexia is far more common among prison inmates than the general population as a result of a series of bad turns that often begin when children who can't read fall into a pattern of failure in school and develop low self-esteem. Some of them turn to bullying or other forms of antisocial behavior to compensate, and this strategy, if left unaddressed, can escalate into criminality. While it is difficult for learners with dyslexia to gain essential reading skills, and this disadvantage can create a constellation of other learning difficulties, the high achievers interviewed for the Fortune article argue that some people with dyslexia seem to possess or to develop a greater capacity for creativity and problem solving, whether as a result of their neural wiring or the necessity they face to find ways to compensate for their disability. To succeed, many of those interviewed reported that they had to learn at an early age how to grasp the big picture rather than struggling to decipher the component parts, how to think outside the box, how to act strategically, and how to manage risk-taking, skills of necessity that once learned gave them a decided leg up later in their careers. Some of these skills may indeed have a neurological basis. Experiments by Gadi Geiger and Jerome Letvin at Massachusetts Institute of Technology have found that individuals with dyslexia do poorly at interpreting information in their visual field of focus when compared to those without dyslexia. However, they significantly outperform others in their ability to interpret information from their peripheral vision, suggesting that a superior ability to grasp the big picture might have its origins in the brain's synaptic wiring. There's an enormous body of literature on dyslexia, which we won't delve into here beyond acknowledging that some neurological differences can count for a lot in how we learn, and for some subset of these individuals, a combination of high motivation, focused and sustained personal support, and compensating skills or intelligences have enabled them to thrive. Belief in the learning styles credo is pervasive. Assessing students' learning styles has been recommended at all levels of education, and teachers are urged to offer classroom material in many different ways so that each student can take it in the way he or she is best equipped to learn it. Learning styles theory has taken root in management development as well as in vocational and professional settings, including the training of military pilots, health care workers, municipal police, and beyond. A report on a 2004 survey conducted for Britain's Learning and Skills Research Centre compares more than 70 distinct learning styles theories currently being offered in the marketplace, each with its companion assessment instruments to diagnose a person's particular style. The report's authors characterize the purveyors of these instruments as an industry bedeviled by vested interests that tout, quote, a bedlam of contradictory claims, and express concerns about the temptation to classify, label, and stereotype individuals. The authors relate an incident at a conference where a student who had completed an assessment instrument reported back, quote, I learned that I was a low auditory kinesthetic learner, so there's no point in me reading a book or listening to anyone for more than a few minutes, unquote. The wrong-headedness of this conclusion is manifold. It's not supported by science, and it instills a corrosive, misguided sense of diminished potential. Notwithstanding the sheer number and variety of learning styles models, if you narrow the field to those that are most widely accepted, you still fail to find a consistent theoretical pattern. An approach called VARK, V-A-R-K, advocated by Neil Fleming, differentiates people according to whether they prefer to learn through experiences that are primarily visual, auditory, reading, or kinesthetic, i.e. moving, touching, and active exploration. According to Fleming, VARK describes only one aspect of a person's learning style, which in its entirety consists of 18 different dimensions, including preferences in temperature, light, food intake, biorhythms, and working with others versus working alone. Other learning styles theories and materials are based on rather different dimensions. One commonly used inventory based on the work of Kenneth Dunn and Rita Dunn assesses six different aspects of an individual's learning style. Environmental, emotional, sociological, perceptual, physiological, and psychological. Still other models assess styles along such dimensions as these. Concrete versus abstract styles of perceiving. Active experimentation versus reflective observation modes of processing. Random versus sequential styles of organizing. The Honey and Mumford learning styles questionnaire, which is popular in managerial settings, helps employees determine whether their styles are predominantly activist, reflector, theorist, or pragmatist, and to improve in the areas where they score low so as to become more versatile learners. The simple fact that different theories embrace such wildly discrepant dimensions gives cause for concern about their scientific underpinnings. While it's true that most all of us have a decided preference for how we like to learn new material, the premise behind learning styles is that we learn better when the mode of presentation matches the particular style in which an individual is best able to learn. That is the critical claim. In 2008, the cognitive psychologists Harold Paschler, Mark McDaniel, Doug Rohrer, and Bob Bjork were commissioned to conduct a review to determine whether this critical claim is supported by scientific evidence. The team set out to answer two questions. First, what forms of evidence are needed for institutions to justify basing their instructional styles on assessments of students' or employees' learning styles? For the results to be credible, the team determined that a study would need to have several attributes. Initially, students must be divided into groups according to their learning styles. Then, they must be randomly assigned to different classrooms, teaching the same material but offering it through different instructional methods. Afterward, all the students must take the same test. The test must show that students with a particular learning style, e.g. visual learners, did the best when they received instruction in their own learning style, visual, relative to instruction in a different style, auditory. In addition, the other types of learners must be shown to profit more from their style of instruction than another style, auditory learners learning better from auditory than from visual presentation. The second question the team asked was whether this kind of evidence existed. The answer was no. They found very few studies designed to be capable of testing the validity of learning styles theory in education, and of those, they found that virtually none validated and several flatly contradicted. Moreover, their review showed that it is more important that the mode of instruction matched the nature of the subject being taught, visual instruction for geometry and geography, verbal instruction for poetry, and so on. When instructional style matches the nature of the content, all learners learn better regardless of their differing preferences for how the material is taught. The fact that the evidence is not there to validate learning styles theory doesn't mean that all theories are wrong. Learning styles theories take many forms. Some may be valid, but if so, we can't know which, because the number of rigorous studies is extremely small. The research base does not exist to answer the question. On the basis of their findings, Paschler and his colleagues argued that the evidence currently available does not justify the huge investment of time and money that would be needed to assess students and restructure instruction around learning styles. Until such evidence is produced, it makes more sense to emphasize the instructional techniques, like those outlined in this book, that have been validated by research as benefiting learners regardless of their style preferences. Successful intelligence. Intelligence is a learning difference that we do know matters. But what exactly is it? Every human society has a concept that corresponds to the idea of intelligence in our culture. The problem of how to define and measure intelligence in a way that accounts for people's intellectual horsepower and provides a fair indicator of their potential has been with us for over a hundred years, with psychologists trying to measure this construct since early in the 20th century. Psychologists today generally accept that individuals possess at least two kinds of intelligence. Fluid intelligence is the ability to reason, see relationships, think abstractly, and hold information in mind while working on a problem. Crystallized intelligence is one's accumulated knowledge of the world and the procedures or mental models one has developed from past learning and experience. Together, these two kinds of intelligence enable us to learn, reason, and solve problems. Traditionally, IQ tests have been used to measure individuals' logical and verbal potential. These tests assign an intelligence quotient, which denotes the ratio of mental age to physical age times 100. That is, an eight-year-old who could solve problems on a test that most ten-year-olds can solve has an IQ of 125. 10 divided by 8 times 100. It used to be thought that IQ was fixed from birth, but traditional notions of intellectual capacity are being challenged. One countervailing idea put forward by the psychologist Howard Gardner to account for the broad variety in people's abilities is the hypothesis that humans have as many as eight different kinds of intelligence. Logical-mathematical intelligence. Ability to think critically, work with numbers and abstractions and the like. Spatial intelligence. Three-dimensional judgment and the ability to visualize with the mind's eye. Linguistic intelligence. Ability to work with words and languages. Kinesthetic intelligence. Physical dexterity and control of one's body. Musical intelligence. Sensitivity to sounds, rhythms, tones and music. Interpersonal intelligence. Ability to read other people and work with them effectively. Intrapersonal intelligence. Ability to understand oneself and make accurate judgments of one's knowledge, abilities and effectiveness. Naturalistic intelligence. The ability to discriminate and relate to one's natural surroundings. For example, the kinds of intelligence invoked by a gardener, hunter or chef. Gardner's ideas are attractive for many reasons. Not the least because they attempt to explain human differences that we can observe but cannot account for with modern Western definitions of intelligence with their focus on language and logic abilities. As with learning styles theory, the multiple intelligences model has helped educators to diversify the kinds of learning experiences they offer. Unlike learning styles, which can have the perverse effect of causing individuals to perceive their learning abilities as limited, multiple intelligences theory elevates the sheer variety of tools in our native toolkit. What both theories lack is an underpinning of empirical validation, a problem Gardner himself recognizes, acknowledging that determining one's particular mix of intelligences is more an art than a science. While Gardner helpfully expands our notion of intelligence, the psychologist Robert J. Sternberg helpfully distills it again. Rather than eight intelligences, Sternberg's model proposes three, analytical, creative and practical. Further, unlike Gardner's theory, Sternberg's is supported by empirical research. One of Sternberg's studies of particular interest to the question of how we measure intelligence was carried out in rural Kenya, where he and his associates looked at children's informal knowledge of herbal medicines. Regular use of these medicines is an important part of Kenyans' daily lives. This knowledge is not taught in schools or assessed by tests, but children who can identify the herbs and who know their appropriate uses and dosages are better adapted to succeed in their environment than children without that knowledge. The children who performed best on tests of this indigenous informal knowledge did worst relative to their peers on tests of the formal academic subjects taught in school.