to buy the boxcars right and understand the way to go about it. What in lay terms we call know-how. Knowledge is not know-how until you understand the underlying principles at work and can fit them together into a structure larger than the sum of its parts. Know-how is learning that enables you to go do. The Takeaway Given what we know about learning differences, what's the takeaway? Be the one in charge. There's an old truism from sales school that says you can't shoot a deer from the lodge. The same goes for learning. You have to suit up, get out the door, and find what you're after. Mastery, especially of complex ideas, skills, and processes is a quest. It is not a grade on a test, something bestowed by a coach, or a quality that simply seeps into your being with old age and gray hair. Embrace the notion of successful intelligence. Go wide. Don't roost in a pigeonhole of your preferred learning style, but take command of your resources and tap all of your intelligences to master the knowledge or skill you want to possess. Describe what you want to know, do, or accomplish. Then list the competencies required, what you need to learn, and where you can find the knowledge or skill. Then go get it. Consider your expertise to be in a state of continuing development. Practice dynamic testing as a learning strategy to discover your weaknesses and focus on improving yourself in those areas. It's smart to build on your strengths, but you will become ever more competent and versatile if you also use testing and trial and error to continue to improve in the areas where your knowledge or performance are not pulling their weight. Adopt active learning strategies like retrieval practice, spacing, and interleaving. Be aggressive. Like those with dyslexia who have become high achievers, develop workarounds or compensating skills for impediments or holes in your aptitudes. Don't rely on what feels best. Like a good pilot checking his instruments, use quizzing, peer review, and the other tools described in Chapter 5 to make sure your judgment of what you know and can do is accurate and that your strategies are moving you toward your goals. Don't assume that you're doing something wrong if the learning feels hard. Remember that difficulties you can overcome with greater cognitive effort will more than repay you in the depth and durability of your learning. Distill the underlying principles. Build the structure. If you're an example learner, study examples two at a time or more rather than one by one, asking yourself in what ways they are alike and different. Are the differences such that they require different solutions or are the similarities such that they respond to a common solution? Break your idea or desired competency down into its component parts. If you think you are a low structure builder or an example learner trying to learn new material, pause periodically and ask what the central ideas are, what the rules are. Describe each idea and recall the related points. Which are the big ideas and which are supporting concepts or nuances? If you were to test yourself on the main ideas, how would you describe them? What kind of scaffold or framework can you imagine that holds these central ideas together? If we borrowed the winding stair metaphor as a structure for Bruce Hendry's investment model, it might work something like this. Spiral stairs have three parts, a center post, treads, and risers. Let's say the center post is the thing that connects us from where we are down here to where we want to be up there. It's the investment opportunity. Each tread is an element of the deal that protects us from losing money and dropping back, and each riser is an element that lifts us up a notch. Treads and risers must both be present for the stairs to function and for a deal to be attractive. Knowing the scrap value of boxcars is a tread. Bruce knows he won't get less than that for his investment. Another tread is the guaranteed lease income while his capital is tied up. What are some risers? Impending scarcity, which will raise values. The like-new condition of the cars, which is latent value. A deal that doesn't have treads and risers will not protect the downside or reliably deliver the upside. Structure is all around us and available to us through the poet's medium of metaphor. A tree with its roots, trunk and branches, a river, a village encompassing streets and blocks, houses and stores and offices. The structure of the village explains how these elements are interconnected so that the village has a life and a significance that would not exist if these elements were scattered randomly across an empty landscape. By abstracting the underlying rules and piecing them into a structure, you go for more than knowledge. You go for know-how, and that kind of mastery will put you ahead. Chapter 7 Increase Your Abilities In a famous study from the 1970s, a researcher showed nursery school children one at a time into a room with no distractions except for a marshmallow resting on a tray on a desk. As the researcher left the room, the child was told he could eat the marshmallow now or, if he waited for 15 minutes, he would be rewarded with a second marshmallow. Walter Mischel and his graduate students observed through a mirror as the children faced their dilemma. Some popped the marshmallow into their mouths the moment the researcher left, but others were able to wait. To help themselves hold back, these kids tried anything they could think of. They covered their eyes with their hands, rested their heads on their arms, talked to themselves, sang, invented games with their hands and feet, and even tried to fall asleep, to avert their eyes and divert themselves from the reward. Of more than 600 children who took part in the experiment, only one-third succeeded in resisting temptation long enough to get the second marshmallow. A series of follow-up studies, the most recent in 2011, found that the nursery school children who had been more successful in delaying gratification in this exercise grew up to be more successful in school and in their careers. The marshmallow study is sublime in its simplicity and as a metaphor for life. We are born with the gift of our genes, but to a surprising degree, our success is also determined by focus and self-discipline, which are the offspring of motivation and one's sense of personal empowerment. Consider James Patterson, a spirited 30-something Welshman, and his unwitting seduction by the power of mnemonic devices and the world of memory competitions. The word mnemonic is from the Greek word for memory. Mnemonic devices are mental tools that can take many forms, but generally are used to help hold a large volume of new material in memory, queued for ready recall. James first learned of mnemonics when one of his university instructors fleetingly mentioned their utility during a lecture. He went straight home, searched the web, bought a book. If he could learn these techniques, he figured, he could memorize his classwork in short order and have a lot more time to hang out with friends. He started practicing memorizing things, names and dates for his psychology classes and the textbook page numbers where they were cited. He also practiced parlor tricks, like memorizing the sequence of playing cards in a shuffled deck or strings of random numbers read from lists made up by friends. He spent long hours honing his techniques, becoming adept and the life of the party among his social set. The year was 2006, and when he learned of a memory competition to be held in Cambridge, England, he decided on a lark to enter it. There he surprised himself by taking first place in the beginner category, a performance for which he pocketed a cool one thousand euros. He was hooked. Figuring he had nothing to lose by taking a flyer, he went on to compete in his first World Memory Championships in London that same year. With mnemonics, James had figured to pocket some easy facts to ace his exams without spending the time and effort to fully master the material, but he discovered something entirely different, as we will recount shortly. Memory athletes, as these competitors call themselves, all get their start in different ways. Nelson Dellis, the 2012 U.S. Memory Champion, began after his grandmother died of Alzheimer's disease. Nelson watched her decline over time, with her ability to remember being the first cognitive faculty to go. Although only in his twenties, Nelson wondered if he were destined for the same fate and what he could do about it. He discovered mind sports, hoping that if he could develop his memory to great capacity, then he might have reserves if the disease did strike him later in life. Nelson is another memory athlete on his way up, and he has started a foundation, Climb for Memory, to raise awareness about and funds for research for this terrible disease. Nelson also climbs mountains, twice reaching near the summit of Mount Everest, hence the name. We meet others in this chapter who, like Patterson and Dellis, have sought successfully to raise their cognitive abilities in one way or another. The brain is remarkably plastic, to use the term applied in neuroscience, even into old age for most people. In this chapter's discussion of raising intellectual abilities, we review some of the questions science is trying to answer about the brain's ability to change itself throughout life and people's ability to influence those changes and to raise their IQs. We then describe three known cognitive strategies for getting more out of the mental horsepower you've already got. In a sense, the infant brain is like the infant nation. When John Fremont arrived with his expeditionary force at Pueblo de Los Angeles in 1846 in the U.S. campaign to take western territory from Mexico, he had no way to report his progress to President James Polk in Washington except to send his scout, Kit Carson, across the continent on his mule. A round trip of nearly 6,000 miles over mountains, deserts, wilderness, and prairies, Fremont pressed Carson to whip himself into a lather, not even to stop to shoot game along the way, but to sustain himself by eating the mules as they broke down and needed replacing. That such a journey would be required reveals the undeveloped state of the country. The five-foot, four-inch, 140-pound Carson was the best we had for getting word from one coast to the other. Despite the continent's boundless natural assets, the fledgling nation had little in the way of capability. To become mighty, it would need cities, universities, factories, farms, and seaports, and the roads, trains, and telegraph lines to connect them. It's the same with the brain. We come into the world endowed with the raw material of our genes, but we become capable through the learning and development of mental models and neural pathways that enable us to reason, solve, and create. We have been raised to think that the brain is hardwired and our intellectual potential is more or less set from birth. We now know otherwise. Average IQs have risen over the past century with changes in living conditions. When people suffer brain damage from strokes or accidents, scientists have seen the brain somehow reassign duties so that adjacent networks of neurons take over the work of damaged areas, enabling people to regain lost capacities. Competitions between memory athletes like James Patterson and Nelson Dellis have emerged as an international sport among people who have trained themselves to perform astonishing acts of recall. Expert performance in medicine, science, music, chess, or sports has been shown to be the product not just of innate gifts, as had long been thought, but of skills laid down layer by layer through thousands of hours of dedicated practice. In short, research and the modern record have shown that we and our brains are capable of much greater feats than scientists would have thought possible even a few decades ago. Neuroplasticity. All knowledge and memory are physiological phenomena held in our neurons and neural pathways. The idea that the brain is not hardwired but plastic, mutable, something that reorganizes itself with each new task is a recent revelation, and we are just at the frontiers of understanding what it means and how it works. In a helpful review of the neuroscience, John T. Brewer took on this question as it relates to the initial development and stabilization of the brain's circuitry and our ability to bolster the intellectual ability of our children through early stimulation. We're born with about 100 billion nerve cells called neurons. A synapse is a connection between neurons enabling them to pass signals. For a period shortly before and after birth, we undergo, quote, an exuberant burst of synapse formation in which the brain wires itself. The neurons sprout microscopic branches called axons that reach out in search of tiny nubs on other neurons called dendrites. When axon meets dendrite, a synapse is formed. In order for some axons to find their target dendrites, they must travel vast distances to complete the connections that make up our neurocircuitry, a journey of such daunting scale and precision that Brewer likens it to finding one's way clear across the United States to a waiting partner on the opposite coast, not unlike Kit Carson's mission to President Polk for General Fremont. It's this circuitry that enables our senses, cognition, and motor skills, including learning and memory, and it is this circuitry that forms the possibilities and the limits of one's intellectual capacity. The number of synapses peaks at the age of one or two, at about 50 percent higher than the average number we possess as adults. A plateau period follows that lasts until around puberty, whereupon this overabundance begins to decline as the brain goes through a period of synaptic pruning. We arrive at our adult complement at around age 16 with a staggering number, thought to total about 150 trillion connections. We don't know why the infant brain produces an overabundance of connections or how it subsequently determines which ones to prune. Some neuroscientists believe that the connections we don't use are the ones that fade and die away, a notion that would seem to manifest the use-it-or-lose-it principle, and argue for the early stimulation of as many connections as possible in hopes of retaining them for life. Another theory suggests that burgeoning and winnowing is determined by genetics, and we have little or no influence over which synapses survive and which do not. While children's brains acquire a tremendous amount of information during the early years, the neuroscientist Patricia Goldman-Rakish told the Education Commission of the States, most learning is acquired after synaptic formation stabilizes. Quote, From the time a child enters first grade, through high school, college, and beyond, there is little change in the number of synapses. It is during the time when no or little synapse formation occurs that most learning takes place, and we develop adult-like skills in language, mathematics, and logic. And it is likely during this period, more than during infancy, in the view of neuroscientist Harry T. Chaghani, that experience and environmental stimulation fine-tune one's circuits and make one's neuronal architecture unique. In a 2011 article, a team of British academics in the fields of psychology and sociology reviewed the evidence from neuroscience and concluded that the architecture and gross structure of the brain appear to be substantially determined by genes, but that the fine structure of neural networks appears to be shaped by experience and to be capable of substantial modification. That the brain is mutable has become evident on many fronts. Norman Doidge, in his book The Brain That Changes Itself, looks at compelling cases of patients who have overcome severe impairments with the assistance of neurologists whose research and practice are advancing the frontiers of our understanding of neuroplasticity. One of these was Paul Bakirita, who pioneered a device to help patients who have suffered damage to sensory organs. Bakirita's device enables them to regain lost skills by teaching the brain to respond to stimulation of other parts of their bodies, substituting one sensory system for another, much as a blind person can learn to navigate through echolocation, learning to, quote, see her surroundings by interpreting the different sounds from the tap of a cane, or can learn to read through the sense of touch using braille. One of Bakirita's patients had suffered damage to her vestibular system, how the inner ear senses balance and spatial orientation that had left her so unbalanced that she was unable to stand, walk, or maintain her independence. Bakirita rigged a helmet with carpenter's