from it. In 2010, the New York Times reported on a scientific study that showed that students who read a passage of text and then took a test asking them to recall what they had read retained an astonishing 50% more of the information a week later than students who had not been tested. This would seem like good news, but here's how it was greeted in many online comments. Once again, another author confuses learning with recalling information. I personally would like to avoid as many tests as possible, especially with my grade on the line. Trying to learn in a stressful environment is no way to help retain information. Nobody should care whether memorization is enhanced by practice testing or not. Our children cannot do much of anything anymore. Forget memorization, many commenters argued. Education should be about high order skills. If memorization is irrelevant to complex problem solving, don't tell your neurosurgeon. The frustration many people feel towards standardized dipstick tests given for the sole purpose of measuring learning is understandable, but it steers us away from appreciating one of the most potent learning tools available to us. Pitting the learning of basic knowledge against the development of creative thinking is a false choice. Both need to be cultivated. The stronger one's knowledge about the subject at hand, the more nuanced one's creativity can be in addressing a new problem. Just as knowledge amounts to little without the exercise of ingenuity and imagination, creativity, absent a sturdy foundation of knowledge, builds a shaky house. Studying the Testing Effect in the Lab The testing effect has a solid pedigree in empirical research. The first large-scale investigation was published in 1917. Children in grades 3, 5, 6, and 8 studied brief biographies from Who's Who in America. Some of them were directed to spend varying lengths of the study time looking up for material and silently reciting to themselves what it contained. Those who did not do so simply continued to re-read the material. At the end of the period, all of the children were asked to write down what they could remember. The recall test was repeated three to four hours later. All the groups who had engaged in the recitation showed better retention than those who had not done so but had merely continued to review the material. The best results were from those spending about 60 percent of the study time in recitation. A second landmark study, published in 1939, tested over 3,000 sixth-graders across Iowa. The kids studied 600-word articles and then took tests at various times before a final test two months later. The experiment showed a couple of interesting results. The longer the first test was delayed, the greater the forgetting, and second, once a student had taken a test, the forgetting nearly stopped, and the student's score on subsequent tests dropped very little. Around 1940, interest turned to the study of forgetting, and investigating the potential of testing as a form of retrieval practice and as a learning tool fell out of favor. So did the use of testing as a research tool. Since testing interrupts forgetting, you can't use it to measure forgetting because that, quote, contaminates the subject. Interest in the testing effect resurfaced in 1967 with the publication of a study showing that research subjects who were presented with lists of 36 words learned as much from repeated testing after initial exposure to the words as they did from repeated studying. These results, that testing led to as much learning as studying did, challenged the received wisdom, turned researchers' attention back to the potential of testing as a learning tool, and stimulated a boomlet in testing research. In 1978, researchers found that mass studying, cramming, leads to higher scores on an immediate test but results in faster forgetting compared to practicing retrieval. In a second test, two days after the initial test, the crammers had forgotten 50% of what they had been able to recall on the initial test, while those who had spent the same period practicing retrieval instead of studying had forgotten only 13% of the information recalled initially. A subsequent study was aimed at understanding what effect taking multiple tests would have on subjects' long-term retention. Students heard a story that named 60 concrete objects. Those students who were tested immediately after exposure recalled 53% of the objects on this initial test, but only 39% a week later. On the other hand, a group of students who learned the same material but were not tested at all until a week later recalled 28%, thus taking a single test boosted performance by 11% after a week. But what effect would three immediate tests have relative to one? Another group of students were tested three times after initial exposure, and a week later they were able to recall 53% of the objects, the same as on the initial test for the group receiving one test. In effect, the group that received three tests had been immunized against forgetting, compared to the one-test group, and the one-test group remembered more than those who had received no test immediately following exposure. Thus, and in agreement with later research, multiple sessions of retrieval practice are generally better than one, especially if the test sessions are spaced out. In another study, researchers showed that simply asking a subject to fill in a word's missing letters resulted in better memory of the word. Consider a list of word pairs. For a pair like foot, shoe, those who studied the pair intact had lower subsequent recall than those who studied the pair from a clue as obvious as foot, s, blank, blank, e. This experiment was a demonstration of what researchers call the generation effect. The modest effort required to generate the queued answer while studying the pairs strengthened memory of the target word tested later, shoe. Interestingly, this study found that the ability to recall the word pair on later tests was greater if the practice retrieval was delayed by 20 intervening word pairs than when it came immediately after first studying the pair. Why would that be? One argument suggested that the greater effort required by the delayed recall solidified the memory better. Researchers began to ask whether the schedule of testing mattered. The answer is yes. When retrieval practice is spaced, allowing some forgetting to occur between tests, it leads to stronger long-term retention than when it is masked. Researchers began looking for opportunities to take their inquiries out of the lab and into the classroom using the kinds of material students are required to learn in school. Studying the Testing Effect in the Wild In 2005, we and our colleagues approached Roger Chamberlain, the principal of a middle school in nearby Columbia, Illinois, with a proposition. The positive effects of retrieval practice had been demonstrated many times in controlled laboratory settings, but rarely in a regular classroom setting. Would the principal, teachers, kids, and parents of Columbia Middle School be willing subjects in a study to see how the testing effect would work in the wild? Chamberlain had concerns. If this was just about memorization, he wasn't especially interested. His aim is to raise the school's students to higher forms of learning—analysis, synthesis, and application, as he put it. And he was concerned about his teachers—an energetic faculty with curricula and varied instructional methods he was loathe to disrupt. On the other hand, the study's results could be instructive, and participation would bring enticements in the form of smart boards and clickers—automated response systems—for the classrooms of participating teachers. Money for new technology is famously tight. A sixth-grade social studies teacher, Patrice Bain, was eager to give it a try. For the researchers, a chance to work in the classroom was compelling, and the school's terms were accepted. The study would be minimally intrusive by fitting within existing curricula, lesson plans, test formats, and teaching methods. The same textbooks would be used. The only difference in the class would be the introduction of occasional short quizzes. The study would run for three semesters—a year and a half—through several chapters of the social studies textbook, covering topics such as ancient Egypt, Mesopotamia, India, and China. The project was launched in 2006. It would prove to be a good decision. For the six social studies classes, a research assistant, Pooja Agrawal, designed a series of quizzes that would test students on roughly one-third of the material covered by the teacher. These quizzes were for no-stakes, meaning that scores were not counted toward a grade. The teacher excused herself from the classroom for each quiz so as to remain unaware of which material was being tested. One quiz was given at the start of class, on material from assigned reading that hadn't yet been discussed. A second was given at the end of class, after the teacher had covered the material for the day's lesson. And a review quiz was given twenty-four hours before each unit exam. There was concern that if students tested better in the final exam on material that had been quizzed than on material not quizzed, it could be argued that the simple act of re-exposing them to the material in the quizzes was responsible for the superior learning, not the retrieval practice. To counter this possibility, some of the non-quizzed material was interspersed with the quizzed material, provided as simple review statements like, quote, the Nile River has two major tributaries, the White Nile and the Blue Nile, unquote, with no retrieval required. The facts were quizzed for some classes, but just re-studied for others. The quizzes took only a few minutes of classroom time. After the teacher stepped out of the room, Agarwal projected a series of slides onto the board at the front of the room and read them to the students. Each slide presented either a multiple-choice question or a statement of fact. When the slide contained a question, students used clickers, handheld cell phone-like remotes, to indicate their answer choice, A, B, C, or D. When all had responded, the correct answer was revealed, so as to provide feedback and correct errors. Although teachers were not present for these quizzes, under normal circumstances with teachers administering quizzes, they would see immediately how well students are tracking the study material and use the results to guide further discussion or study. Unit exams were the normal pencil and paper tests given by the teacher. Exams were also given at the end of the semester and at the end of the year. Students had been exposed to all of the material tested in these exams through the teacher's normal classroom lessons, homework, worksheets, and so on, but they had also been quizzed three times on one-third of the material, and they had seen another third presented for additional study three times. The balance of the material was neither quizzed nor additionally reviewed in class beyond the initial lesson and whatever reading a student may have done. The results were compelling. The kids scored a full grade level higher on the material that had been quizzed than on the material that had not been quizzed. Moreover, test results for the material that had been reviewed as statements of fact but not quizzed were no better than those for the non-reviewed material. Again, mere rereading does not much help. In 2007, the research was extended to eighth grade science classes covering genetics, evolution, and anatomy. The regimen was the same and the results equally impressive. At the end of three semesters, the eighth graders averaged 79 percent C plus on the science material that had not been quizzed compared to 92 percent A minus on the material that had been quizzed. The testing effect persisted eight months later at the end of year exams, confirming what many laboratory studies have shown about the long-term benefits of retrieval practice. The effect, doubtless, would have been greater if the retrieval practice had continued and occurred once a month, say, in the intervening months. The lesson from these studies has been taken to heart by many of the teachers at Columbia Middle School. Long after concluding their participation in the research studies, Patrice Bain's sixth grade social studies classes continue today to follow a schedule of quizzes before lessons, quizzes after lessons, and then a review quiz prior to the chapter test. John Wehrenberg, an eighth grade history teacher who was not part of the research, has knitted retrieval practice into his classroom in many different forms, including quizzing, and he provides additional online tools at his website like flashcards and games. After reading passages on the history of slavery, for example, his students are asked to write down ten facts about slavery they hadn't known before reading the passages. You don't need electronic gadgetry to practice retrieval. Seven sixth and seventh graders needing to improve their reading and comprehension skills sat in Michelle Spivey's English Classroom 1 period recently with their reading books open to an amusing story. Each student was invited to read a paragraph aloud. Where a student stumbled, Miss Spivey had him try again. When he'd gotten it right, she probed the class to explain the meaning of the passage and what might have been going on in the characters' minds. Retrieval and elaboration, again, no technology required. Quizzes at Columbia Middle School are not onerous events. Following completion of the research studies, students' views were surveyed on this question. Sixty-four percent said the quizzing reduced their anxiety over unit exams, and eighty-nine percent felt it increased learning. The kids expressed disappointment on days when clickers were not used because the activity broke up the teacher's lecture and proved enjoyable. Principal Chamberlain, when asked what he thought the study results indicated, replied simply, quote, Retrieval practice has a significant impact on kids' learning. This is telling us that it's valuable and that teachers are well advised to incorporate it into their instructional technique, end quote. Are similar effects found at a later age? Andrew Sobel teaches a class in International Political Economics at Washington University in St. Louis, a lecture course populated by 160 to 170 students, mostly freshmen and sophomores. Over a period of several years, he noticed a growing problem with attendance. On any given day by mid-semester, twenty-five to thirty-five percent of the class would be absent, compared to earlier in the semester when maybe ten percent would be absent. The problem wasn't unique to his class, he says. A lot of professors give students their PowerPoint slides, so the students just stop coming to class. Sobel fought back by withholding his slides, but by the end of the semester, many students stopped showing up anyway. The class syllabus included two big tests, a midterm and a final. Looking for some way to leverage attendance, Sobel replaced the big tests with nine pop quizzes. Because the quizzes would determine the course grade and would be unannounced, students would be well advised to show up for class. The results were distressing. Over the semester, a third or more of the students bailed out. Quote, I really got hammered in the teaching reviews, Sobel told us. The kids hated it. If they didn't do well on a quiz, they dropped the course rather than get a bad grade in it. Of those who stayed, I got this bifurcation between those who actually showed up and did the work and those who didn't. I found myself handing out A-pluses, which I'd never given before, and more C's than I'd ever given. Unquote. With so much pushback, he had little choice but to drop the experiment and reinstate the old format, lectures with a midterm and final. A couple of years later, however, after hearing a presentation about the learning benefits of testing, he added a third major test during the semester to see what effect it might have on his students' learning. They did better, but not by as much as he had hoped, and the attendance problems persisted. He scratched his head and changed the syllabus once again. This time, he announced that there would be nine quizzes during the semester, and he was explicit about when they would be. No surprises, and no midterm or final exams, because he didn't want to give up that much of his lecture time. Despite fears that enrollments would plummet again, they actually increased by a handful. Quote, unlike the pop quizzes, which kids hate, these were all in the syllabus. If they missed one, it was their own fault. It wasn't because I surprised them or was being pernicious. They were comfortable with that. Unquote. Sobel took satisfaction in seeing attendance improve as well. Quote, they would skip some classes on the days they didn't have a quiz, particularly the spring semester, but they showed up for the quizzes. Unquote. Like the course, the quizzes were cumulative, and the questions were similar to those on the exams he used to give, but the quality of the answers he was getting by mid-semester was much better than he was accustomed to seeing on the midterms. Five years into this new format, he's sold on it. Quote, the quality of discussions in class has gone way up. I see that big a difference in their written work just by going from three exams to nine quizzes. Unquote. By the end of the semester, he has them writing paragraphs on the concepts covered in class, sometimes a full-page essay, and the quality