knowledge or skill, the more practice of retrieval will entrench it. Not long ago, the California Polytechnic State University baseball team at San Luis Obispo became involved in an interesting experiment in improving their batting skills. They were all highly experienced players, adept at making solid contact with the ball, but they agreed to take extra batting practice twice a week, following two different practice regimens, to see which type of practice produced better results. Hitting a baseball is one of the hardest skills in sports. It takes less than half a second for a ball to reach home plate. In this instant, the batter must execute a complex combination of perceptual, cognitive, and motor skills, determining the type of pitch, anticipating how the ball will move, and aiming and timing the swing to arrive at the same place and moment as the ball. This chain of perceptions and responses must be so deeply entrenched as to become automatic, because the ball is in the catcher's mitt long before you can even begin to think your way through how to connect with it. Part of the Cal Poly team practiced in the standard way. They practiced hitting 45 pitches, evenly divided into three sets. Each set consisted of one type of pitch thrown 15 times. For example, the first set would be 15 fastballs, the second set, 15 curveballs, and the third set, 15 change-ups. This was a form of massed practice. For each set of 15 pitches, as the batter saw more of that type, he got gratifyingly better at anticipating the balls, timing his swings, and connecting. Learning seemed easy. The rest of the team were given a more difficult practice regimen. The three types of pitches were randomly interspersed across the block of 45 throws. For each pitch, the batter had no idea which type to expect. At the end of the 45 swings, he was still struggling somewhat to connect with the ball. These players didn't seem to be developing the proficiency their teammates were showing. The interleaving and spacing of different pitches made learning more arduous and feel slower. The extra practice sessions continued twice weekly for six weeks. At the end, when the players' hitting was assessed, the two groups had clearly benefited differently from the extra practice, and not in the way the players expected. Those who had practiced on the randomly interspersed pitches now displayed markedly better hitting relative to those who had practiced on one type of pitch thrown over and over. These results are all the more interesting when you consider that these players were already skilled hitters prior to the extra training. Bringing their performance to an even higher level is good evidence of a training regimen's effectiveness. Here again, we see two familiar lessons. First, that some difficulties that require more effort and slow down apparent gains, like spacing, interleaving, and mixing up practice, will feel less productive at the time, but will more than compensate for that by making the learning stronger, precise, and enduring. Second, that our judgments of what learning strategies work best for us are often mistaken, colored by illusions of mastery. When the baseball players at Cal Poly practiced curveball after curveball over 15 pitches, it became easier for them to remember the perceptions and responses they needed for that type of pitch. The look of the ball's spin, how the ball changed direction, how fast its direction changed, and how long to wait for it to curve. Performance improved, but the growing ease of recalling these perceptions and responses led to little durable learning. It is one skill to hit a curveball when you know a curveball will be thrown. It is a different skill to hit a curveball when you don't know it's coming. Baseball players need to build the latter skill, but they often practice the former, which, being a form of massed practice, builds performance gains on short-term memory. It was more challenging for the Cal Poly batters to retrieve the necessary skills when practice involved random pitches. Meeting that challenge made the performance gains painfully slow, but also long-lasting. This paradox is at the heart of the concept of desirable difficulties in learning. The more effort required to retrieve or, in effect, relearn something, the better you learn it. In other words, the more you've forgotten about a topic, the more effective relearning will be in shaping your permanent knowledge. How effort helps. Reconsolidating memory. Effortful recall of learning, as happens in spaced practice, requires that you reload or reconstruct the components of the skill or material anew from long-term memory, rather than mindlessly repeating them from short-term memory. During this focused, effortful recall, the learning is made pliable again, the most salient aspects of it become clearer, and the consequent reconsolidation helps to reinforce meaning, strengthen connections to prior knowledge, bolster the cues and retrieval routes for recalling it later, and weaken competing routes. Spaced practice, which allows some forgetting to occur between sessions, strengthens both the learning and the cues and routes for fast retrieval when that learning is needed again, as when the pitcher tries to surprise the batter with a curveball after pitching several fastballs. The more effort that is required to recall a memory or to execute a skill, provided that the effort succeeds, the more the act of recalling or executing benefits the learning. Mast practice gives us the warm sensation of mastery because we're looping information through short-term memory without having to reconstruct the learning from long-term memory. But just as with rereading as a study strategy, the fluency gained through mast practice is transitory and our sense of mastery is illusory. It's the effortful process of reconstructing the knowledge that triggers reconsolidation and deeper learning. Creating mental models. With enough effortful practice, a complex set of interrelated ideas or a sequence of motor skills fuse into a meaningful whole, forming a mental model somewhat akin to a brain app. Learning to drive a car involves a host of simultaneous actions that require all of our powers of concentration and dexterity while we are learning them. But over time, these combinations of cognition and motor skills, for example, the perceptions and maneuvers required to parallel park or manipulate a stick shift, become ingrained as sets of mental models associated with driving. Mental models are forms of deeply entrenched and highly efficient skills, seeing and unloading on a curve ball, or knowledge structures, a memorized sequence of chess moves that, like habits, can be adapted and applied in varied circumstances. Expert performance is built through thousands of hours of practice in your area of expertise, in varying conditions, through which you accumulate a vast library of such mental models that enables you to correctly discern a given situation and instantaneously select and execute the correct response. Broadening mastery. Retrieval practice that you perform at different times and in different contexts and that interleaves different learning material has the benefit of linking new associations to the material. This process builds interconnected networks of knowledge that bolster and support mastery of your field. It also multiplies the cues for retrieving the knowledge, increasing the versatility with which you can later apply it. Think of an experienced chef who has internalized the complex knowledge of how flavors and textures interact, how ingredients change form under heat, the differing effects to be achieved with a saucepan versus a wok, with copper versus cast iron. Think of the fly fisher who can sense the presence of trout and accurately judge the likely species, make the right choice of dry fly, nymph, or streamer, judge the wind, and know how and where to drop that fly to make the trout rise. Think of the kid on the BMX bike who can perform bunny hops, tail whips, 180s, and wall taps off the features of an unfamiliar streetscape. Interleaving and variation mix up the contexts of practice and the other skills and knowledge with which the new material is associated. This makes our mental models more versatile, enabling us to apply our learning to a broader range of situations. Fostering conceptual learning. How do humans learn concepts, for example, the difference between dogs and cats? By randomly coming across dissimilar examples. Chihuahuas, tabby cats, Great Danes, picture book lions, calico cats, Welsh terriers. Spaced and interleaved exposure characterizes most of humans normal experience. It's a good way to learn because this type of exposure strengthens the skills of discrimination. The process of noticing particulars. A turtle comes up for air but a fish doesn't. End of induction. Surmising the general rule, fish can breathe in water. Recall the interleaved study of birds in one case and of paintings in another that helped learners distinguish between bird types or the works of different painters, while at the same time learning to identify underlying commonalities of the examples within a species or an artist's body of work. When asked about their preferences and beliefs, the learners thought that the experience of studying multiple examples of one species of bird before studying examples of another species resulted in better learning. But the interleaved strategy, which was more difficult and felt clunky, produced superior discrimination of differences between types without hindering the ability to learn commonalities within a type. As was true for the baseball players' batting practice, interleaving produced difficulty in retrieving past examples of a particular species, which further solidified the learning of which birds are representative of a particular species. The difficulty produced by interleaving provides a second type of boost to learning. Interleaved practice of related but dissimilar geometric solids requires that you notice similarities and differences in order to select the correct formula for computing the volume. It's thought that this heightened sensitivity to similarities and differences during interleaved practice leads to the encoding of more complex and nuanced representations of the study material, a better understanding of how specimens or types of problems are distinctive and why they call for a different interpretation or solution. Why a northern pike will strike a spoon or a crankbait, say, but a bass will happily powder his nose until you see fit to throw him a grub or a popper. Improving versatility. The retrieval difficulties posed by spacing, interleaving, and variation are overcome by invoking the same mental processes that will be needed later in applying the learning in everyday settings. By mimicking the challenges of practical experience, these learning strategies conform to the admonition to practice like you play and you'll play like you practice. Improving what scientists call transfer of learning, which is the ability to apply what you've learned in new settings. In the Cal Poly batting practice experiment, the act of overcoming the difficulties posed by random types of pitches built a broader vocabulary of mental processes for discerning the nature of the challenge, e.g. what the pitcher is throwing, and selecting among possible responses than did the narrower mental processes sufficient for excelling during massed, non-varied experience. Recall the grade school students who proved more adept at tossing beanbags into three-foot baskets after having practiced tossing into two- and four-foot baskets compared to the students who only practiced tossing into three-foot baskets. Recall the increasing difficulty and complexity of the simulation training in jump school or the cockpit simulator of Matt Brown's business chat. Priming the mind for learning. When you're asked to struggle with solving a problem before being shown how to solve it, the subsequent solution is better learned and more durably remembered. When you've bought your fishing boat and are attempting to attach an anchor line, you're far more likely to learn and remember the bowline knot than when you're standing in the city park being shown the bowline by a Boy Scout who thinks you would lead a richer life if you had a handful of knots in your repertoire. Other learning strategies that incorporate desirable difficulties. We usually think of interference as a detriment to learning, but certain kinds of interference can produce learning benefits, and the positive effects are sometimes surprising. Would you rather read an article that has normal type or type that's somewhat out of focus? Almost surely you would opt for the former. Yet when text on a page is slightly out of focus or presented in a font that is a little difficult to decipher, people recall the content better. Should the outline of a lecture follow the precise flow of a chapter in a textbook, or is it better if the lecture mismatches the text in some ways? It turns out that when the outline of a lecture proceeds in a different order from the textbook passage, the effort to discern the main ideas and reconcile the discrepancy produces better recall of the content. In another surprise, when letters are omitted from words in a text requiring the reader to supply them, reading is slowed and retention improves. In all of these examples, the change from normal presentation introduces a difficulty, disruption of fluency, that makes the learner work harder to construct an interpretation that makes sense. The added effort increases comprehension and learning. Of course, learning will not improve if the difficulty completely obscures the meaning or cannot be overcome. The act of trying to answer a question or attempting to solve a problem, rather than being presented with the information or the solution, is known as generation. Even if you are being quizzed on material you're familiar with, the simple act of filling in a blank has the effect of strengthening your memory of the material and your ability to recall it later. In testing, being required to supply an answer rather than select from multiple choice options often provides stronger learning benefits. Having to write a short essay makes them stronger still. Overcoming these mild difficulties is a form of active learning, where students engage in higher-order thinking tasks rather than passively receiving knowledge conferred by others. When you're asked to supply an answer or a solution to something that's new to you, the power of generation to aid learning is even more evident. One explanation for this effect is the idea that as you cast about for a solution, retrieving related knowledge from memory, you strengthen the route to a gap in your learning even before the answer is provided to fill it. And when you do fill it, connections are made to the related material that is fresh in your mind from the effort. For example, if you're from Vermont and are asked to name the capital of Texas, you might start ruminating on possibilities. Dallas, San Antonio, El Paso, Houston. Even if you're unsure, thinking about alternatives before you hit on or are given the correct answer will help you. Austin, of course. Wrestling with the question, you rack your brain for something that might give you an idea. You may get curious, even stumped or frustrated, and acutely aware of the hole in your knowledge that needs filling. When you're then shown the solution, a light goes on. Unsuccessful attempts to solve a problem encourage deep processing of the answer when it is later supplied, creating fertile ground for its encoding in a way that simply reading the answer cannot. It's better to solve a problem than to memorize a solution. It's better to attempt a solution and supply the incorrect answer than not to make the attempt. The act of taking a few minutes to review what has been learned from an experience or in a recent class and asking yourself questions is known as reflection. After a lecture or reading assignment, for example, you might ask yourself, what are the key ideas? What are some examples? How do these relate to what I already know? Following an experience where you are practicing new knowledge or skills, you might ask, what went well? What could have gone better? What might I need to learn for better mastery? Or what strategies might I use the next time to get better results? Reflection can involve several cognitive activities we have discussed that lead to stronger learning. These include retrieval, recalling recently learned knowledge to mind, elaboration, for example, connecting new knowledge to what you already know, and generation, for example, rephrasing key ideas in your own words or visualizing and mentally rehearsing what you might do differently next time. One form of reflection that is gaining currency in classroom settings is called right to learn. In essence, students reflect on a recent class topic in a brief writing assignment where they may express the main ideas in their own words and relate them to other concepts covered in class or perhaps outside class. For an example, listen to chapter 8 about the learning paragraphs Mary Pat Wenderoth assigns her students in her human physiology course. The learning benefits from the various cognitive activities that are engaged during reflection, retrieval, elaboration, generation have been well established through empirical studies. An interesting recent study specifically examined right to learn as a learning tool. Over 800 college students in several introductory psychology classes listen to lectures throughout the semester.