including management. Ken Barber, Jiffy Lube International's Manager of Learning and Development, says training has to be engaging in order to hold employees' attention. At the time we spoke, Barber was putting the finishing touches on a computer-based simulation game for company managers called A Day in the Life of a Store Manager. The service center manager is confronted with various challenges and is required to select among a range of possible strategies for resolving them. The manager's choices determine how the game unfolds, providing feedback and the opportunity to strive for better outcomes, sharpening decision-making skill. In the six years since Jiffy Lube University was launched, it has received many accolades from the training profession and earned accreditation by the American Council on Education. Employees who progress through training in all job certifications can enroll at a post-secondary institution with seven hours of college credit under their belts. Since the program's beginning, employee turnover has dropped and customer satisfaction has increased. Quote, For most employees of a Jiffy Lube franchisee, this is a way into the workforce, and the training curriculum helps them to continue to grow and expand their knowledge, Barber says. It helps them find a path to success. Unquote. At Anderson Windows and Doors, a culture of continuous improvement turns learning on its head. The production workers teach the managers how to make the plant more efficient. This story is a little different from the others in this chapter in two respects. It's partly about creating a learning culture in the workplace and partly about empowering employees to use what they learn to change the workplace. By encouraging employees to identify problems on the job and propose improvements, the company is supporting one of the most powerful learning techniques we have discussed, wrestling to solve a problem. A good place to focus is on the company's division called Renewal by Anderson, which produces replacement windows of all types and sizes, double-hung, casement, gliding, picture windows, and specialty windows in nontraditional shapes. At Renewal by Anderson's facility in Cottage Grove, Minnesota, their double-hung production line employs 36 people during an eight-hour shift that is divided into three work cells, one for sash fabrication, another for frame fabrication, and one for final assembly. Each work cell has four workstations and is led by a crew leader who is responsible for safety, quality, cost, and delivery within that cell. Workers change jobs every two hours to minimize repetitive stress injuries and broaden cross-training. Like interleaving the practice of two or more different but related topics, frequent switching between jobs builds an understanding of the integrated process for which their unit is responsible and equips workers to respond more broadly to unexpected events that arise. It probably won't surprise you to learn that every job is performed to a written standard that describes each step and the way it is to be taken. The written standard is essential for uniformity of product and quality. Without it, plant manager Rick Winveen says, four different people will perform the job in four different ways and produce four different versions of the product. When a new employee comes on board, he or she is trained following an instructional sequence of practice and feedback that Winveen calls tell, show, do, review. The new worker is paired with an experienced worker. Practice is on the job, and feedback brings learning and performance in line with the written standard. How do the workers train the managers? When a worker has an idea for improving productivity and management endorses it, for instance, revamping the way parts arrive at a workstation to make life easier for the worker and assembly faster, the worker who offered it takes leave from production to help implement the new standard. Quote, everyone's idea is valuable, Winveen told us, whether you're an engineer, a maintenance technician, or a production worker, unquote. Likewise, when one of the production line teams comes up short in meeting its targets, it's the workers who are asked to identify the problem and redesign the production process to solve it. The instructional role of employees is most dramatically illustrated in what Winveen calls a Kaizen event. Kaizen is a Japanese term for improvement. It has been central to Toyota Motor Company's success and has been adopted by many other companies to help create a culture of continuous improvement. When Winveen wanted to affect a major increase in the productivity of the plant's double-hung window line, he recruited a design team to engage in a Kaizen event. The team consisted of an engineer, a maintenance technician, a crew leader from the production line, and five production workers. They were given the stretch goals of reducing the line space requirement by 40% and doubling production. Stretch goals are ones that cannot be reached through incremental improvement but require significant restructuring of methods. The team met in a conference room eight hours a day for a week, in effect teaching each other the elements, capacities, and constraints of the production process and asking themselves how to make it smaller and better. The following week, they came back to Winveen saying, here's what we think we can do. Winveen took their plan to each of the 12 workstations on the line with a simple question, what changes are needed to make this plan work? Production workers and their crew leaders put their heads together and redesigned the components to fit the new plan. The line was disassembled and rebuilt in two halves over two weekends, restarted, and fine-tuned over subsequent months, a process that generated yet an additional 200 improvements suggested by production workers, a learning process of testing, feedback, and correction. The result? After five months, the plant had met Winveen's stretch goals and cut costs in half. During the conversion and shakedown, the production teams never missed a shipment and never had a quality issue. The principle of engagement, actively seeking the ideas of employees from all levels of the plant, is central to the company's culture of continuous improvement. Quote, engagement is a management style of trust and willingness to talk, Winveen says. The production employees learned how to refine the design as they worked, and the company provided a way for suggestions to be heard and for employees to participate in their implementation. A learning culture places the responsibility for learning with the employees and empowers them to change the system. Problems become information rather than failures, and learning by solving the problems, generation, and by teaching others, elaboration, becomes an engine for continuous improvement of performance by individuals and by the production line that they compose. Intergate Acupuncture There are times when getting learning and teaching right can shape the trajectory of an entire life. Consider Eric Isaacman, a 30-something husband, father of two, and passionate practitioner of traditional Chinese medicine, acupuncture, massage, and herbal therapy. I close this chapter with the story of a turning point in Eric's fledgling practice, Intergate Acupuncture in Portland, Oregon. It's the story of a clinic that was succeeding in its therapeutic mission but struggling as a business. Eric and his business partner, Oliver Leonetti, opened Intergate in 2005 after earning graduate degrees in traditional Chinese medicine. Through networking and creative marketing, they began to build a stream of clients. Portland is fertile territory for alternative therapies. The business grew, and so did expenses. They leased larger space, hired an assistant to schedule appointments and manage the office, brought in a third clinician, and hired a back-office employee. Quote, We were growing 35 to 50 percent every year, Eric recalled when we spoke. Quote, The growth covered up a lot that was missing. We didn't have the systems in place to manage costs. We didn't have clear goals or a management hierarchy. It was fast becoming clear that we had no idea how to run a business. Unquote. One of Eric's patients is the Oregon business coach, Kathy Meixner. Meixner offered to help. Quote, Unmanaged growth is scary, she told us. You jump ahead, then you flounder. Unquote. She asked a lot of questions that quickly focused Eric's and Oliver's thinking on critical gaps in their systems. The three then set out a schedule of frequent coaching sessions, between which Eric and Oliver generated elements of the missing infrastructure, operating manual, job descriptions, financial goals, metrics for measuring the performance of their clinicians. Every business serves two masters, its customer and its bottom line. Quote, Our clinicians need to understand more than how to practice traditional Chinese medicine, Eric said, as he reflected on his and Oliver's learning curve. Quote, They need to understand how to turn a patient visit into a relationship and how to help the patient understand his insurance coverage. Satisfying our customers is our highest priority, but we have to pay the bills too. Unquote. Meixner used generation, reflection, elaboration, and rehearsal in her coaching sessions, asking questions that exposed gaps in thinking or that invited the partners to strengthen their understanding of the behavior and tools they needed to adopt in order to be effective managers who delegate and empower their employees. They developed a system to track clinic metrics, like the number of patient visits, patient disappearance rates, and referral sources. They learned how to ensure they were paid appropriately by insurance companies, raising reimbursements from as little as 30 cents on the dollar. They drafted a uniform protocol or template for clinicians to follow in seeing a new patient. They role-played conversations between themselves and their employees. Central to putting the clinic on sound footing has been Eric's becoming an effective coach and teacher of his coworkers. Quote, We're not just letting it be intuitive, he said. For example, the new protocol for clinicians to follow in a patient's initial session helps to clarify what brought the patient in, the therapies that might be useful, how to describe these therapies in terms the patient would be likely to understand, how to discuss fees and insurance reimbursement options, and how to recommend a treatment plan. If you're the clinician, we'll role-play. You are now the patient, and I'm the clinician. We raise questions, objections, and we practice how to respond and end up at the right place for the patient and for the clinic. Then we'll switch roles. We record the role-playing and we listen to the differences. How you have responded to the patient and how I have responded. Unquote. In other words, learning through simulation, generation, testing, feedback, and practice. As we write this, InnerGate is in its eighth year, supporting four clinicians and two-and-a-half administrative staff. A fifth clinician is coming up to speed, and the partners are looking to open a second location. By dedicating themselves to being learners as well as teachers, Eric and Oliver have turned their passion into a solid enterprise and a top-rated acupuncture clinic in Portland. We have talked throughout this book about learning, not about education. The responsibility for learning rests with every individual, whereas the responsibility for education and training, too, rests with the institutions of society. Education embraces a world of difficult questions. Are we teaching the right things? Do we reach children young enough? How should we measure outcomes? Are our young people mortgaging their futures to pay for a college degree? These are urgent issues, and we need to wrestle through them. But while we're doing that, the techniques for highly effective learning that are outlined in this book can be put to use right now, everywhere learners, teachers, and trainers are at work. They come at no cost, they require no structural reform, and the benefits they promise are both real and long-lasting. This recording of Make It Stick by Peter C. Brown, Henry L. Roediger III, and Mark A. McDaniel was presented by Dreamscape Media, LLC. Text Copyright 2014 by Peter C. Brown, Henry L. Roediger III, and Mark A. McDaniel Sound Recording Copyright 2014 Dreamscape Media, LLC This recording was produced by arrangement with the Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. Thank you for listening. Please check www.dreamscapeab.com for Dreamscape's latest releases. Audible hopes you have enjoyed this program.