is not a desirable difficulty for learners who lack the reading skills or language fluency required to hold a train of thought long enough to reconcile the discrepancy. If your textbook is written in Lithuanian and you don't know the language, this hardly represents a desirable difficulty. To be desirable, a difficulty must be something learners can overcome through increased effort. Intuitively, it makes sense that difficulties that don't strengthen the skills you will need or the kinds of challenges you are likely to encounter in the real-world application of your learning are not desirable. Having somebody whisper in your ear while you read the news may be essential training for a TV anchor. Being heckled by role-playing protesters while honing your campaign speech may help train up a politician. But neither of these difficulties is likely to be helpful for Rotary Club presidents or aspiring YouTube bloggers who want to improve their stage presence. A cub towboat pilot on the Mississippi might be required in training to push a string of high-riding empty barges into a lock against a strong side wind. A baseball player might practice hitting with a weight on his bat to strengthen his swing. You might teach a football player some of the principles of ballet for learning balance and movement, but you probably would not teach him the techniques for an effective golf drive or backhand tennis serve. Is there an overarching rule that determines the kinds of impediments that make learning stronger? Time and further research may yield an answer, but the kinds of difficulties we've just described whose desirability is well-documented offer a large and diverse toolkit already at hand. The Takeaway Learning is at least a three-step process. Initial encoding of information is held in short-term working memory before being consolidated into a cohesive representation of knowledge in long-term memory. Encoding reorganizes and stabilizes memory traces, gives them meaning, and makes connections to past experiences and to other knowledge already stored in long-term memory. Retrieval updates learning and enables you to apply it when you need it. Learning always builds on a store of prior knowledge. We interpret and remember events by building connections to what we already know. Long-term memory capacity is virtually limitless. The more you know, the more possible connections you have for adding new knowledge. Because of the vast capacity of long-term memory, having the ability to locate and recall what you know when you need it is key. Your facility for calling up what you know depends on the repeated use of the information to keep retrieval routes strong, and on your establishing powerful retrieval cues that can reactivate the memories. Periodic retrieval of learning helps strengthen connections to the memory and the cues for recalling it, while also weakening routes to competing memories. Retrieval practice that's easy does little to strengthen learning. The more difficult the practice, the greater the benefit. When you recall learning from short-term memory, as in rapid-fire practice, little mental effort is required and little long-term benefit accrues. But when you recall it after some time has elapsed and your grasp of it has become a little rusty, you have to make an effort to reconstruct it. This effortful retrieval both strengthens the memory but also makes the learning pliable again, leading to its reconsolidation. Reconsolidation helps update your memories with new information and connect them to more recent learning. Repeated effortful recall, or practice, helps integrate learning into mental models, in which a set of interrelated ideas or a sequence of motor skills are fused into a meaningful whole that can be adapted and applied in later settings. Examples are the perceptions and manipulations involved in driving a car or in knocking a curveball out of the ballpark. When practice conditions are varied or retrieval is interleaved with the practice of other material, we increase our abilities of discrimination and induction and the versatility with which we can apply the learning in new settings at a later date. Interleaving and variation build new connections, expanding and more firmly entrenching knowledge in memory and increasing the number of cues for retrieval. Trying to come up with an answer rather than having it presented to you, or trying to solve a problem before being shown the solution, leads to better learning and longer retention of the correct answer or solution, even when your attempted response is wrong, so long as corrective feedback is provided. Chapter 5 Avoid Illusions of Knowing At the root of our effectiveness is our ability to grasp the world around us and to take the measure of our own performance. We're constantly making judgments about what we know and don't know and whether we're capable of handling a task or solving a problem. As we work at something, we keep an eye on ourselves, adjusting our thinking or actions as we progress. Adjusting your own thinking is what psychologists call metacognition, meta is Greek for about. Learning to be accurate self-observers helps us to stay out of blind alleys, make good decisions, and reflect on how we might do better next time. An important part of this skill is being sensitive to the ways we can delude ourselves. One problem with poor judgment is that we usually don't know when we've got it. Another problem is the sheer scope of the ways our judgment can be led astray. In this chapter, we discuss perceptual illusions, cognitive biases, and distortions of memory that commonly mislead people. Then we suggest techniques for keeping your judgment squared with reality. The consequences of poor judgment fill the daily papers. During the summer of 2008, three stick-up artists in Minneapolis had a system going of phoning in large fast food orders and then relieving the delivery man of all the goods and cash he carried. As a livelihood, it was a model of simplicity. They kept at it, failing to consider the wisdom of always placing their orders from the same two cell phones and taking delivery at the same two addresses. David Garman, a Minneapolis cop, was working undercover that summer. It was getting more aggressive. At the beginning, it was maybe they had a gun. Then all of a sudden, there were a couple of guns. And then they were hurting the people when they were robbing them. It was a night in August when Garman got a call about a large order phoned into a Chinese restaurant. He organized a small team on short notice and prepared to pose as the delivery guy. He pulled on a bulletproof vest, covered it with a casual shirt, and shoved his .45 automatic into his pants. While his colleagues staked out positions near the delivery address, Garman picked up the food, drove there, and parked with his brights shining on the front door. He'd cut a slit in the bottom of the food bag and tucked a .38 inside to rest in his hand as he carried the package. Quote, the .38 has a covered hammer on it so I can shoot it in a bag. If I were to put the automatic in there, it'd jam and I'd be screwed. So I walk up with the package and I say, hey, sir, did you order some food? He says, yup. And I'm thinking, this guy's really just going to pay me and I'm going to be out of here. And this is going to be the dumbest thing we've ever done. I'm thinking, if he hands me $40, I don't even know how much this food is. But he turns his head to look halfway back and two other guys start to come up. And as they're walking towards me, they flip hoods over their heads. That's when I know it's game time. The first guy whips a gun out of his pocket, racks it, and puts it to my head all in one motion, saying, give me everything you got, motherfucker, or I'll kill you. I ended up shooting him through the bag. It was four rounds. Not such a great livelihood, after all. The guy was hit low and survived, although he is a lesser man as a result. Garmin would have aimed higher if the food package hadn't been so heavy, and he took a lesson from the experience. He's better prepared for the next time, though he'd rather we didn't describe just how. We like to think we're smarter than the average doodle, and even if we're not, we feel affirmed in this delusion each year when the newest crop of Darwin awards circulates by email, that shortlist of self-inflicted fatalities caused by spectacularly poor judgment, as in the case of the attorney in Toronto, who was demonstrating the strength of the windows in his 22-story office tower by throwing his shoulder against the glass when he broke it and fell through. The truth is that we're all hardwired to make errors in judgment. Poor judgment is a skill one must acquire, becoming an astute observer of one's own thinking and performance. We start at a disadvantage for several reasons. One is that, when we're incompetent, we tend to overestimate our competence and see little reason to change. Another is that, as humans, we are readily misled by illusions, cognitive biases, and the stories we construct to explain the world around us and our place within it. To become more competent or even expert, we must learn to recognize competence when we see it in others, become more accurate judges of what we ourselves know and don't know, adopt learning strategies that get results, and find objective ways to track our progress. Two Systems of Knowing In his book Thinking Fast and Slow, Daniel Kahneman describes our two analytic systems. What he calls System 1, or the automatic system, is unconscious, intuitive, and immediate. It draws on our senses and memories to size up a situation in the blink of an eye. It's the running back dodging tackles in his dash for the end zone. It's the Minneapolis cop walking up to a driver he's pulled over on a chilly day, taking evasive action even before he's fully aware that his eye has seen a bead of sweat run down the driver's temple. System 2, the controlled system, is our slower process of conscious analysis and reasoning. It's the part of thinking that considers choices, makes decisions, and exerts self-control. We also use it to train System 1 to recognize and respond to particular situations that demand reflexive action. The running back is using System 2 when he walks through the moves in his playbook. The cop is using it when he practices taking a gun from a shooter. The neurosurgeon is using it when he rehearses his repair of the torn sinus. System 1 is automatic and deeply influential, but it is susceptible to illusion, and you depend on System 2 to help you manage yourself by checking your impulses, planning ahead, identifying choices, thinking through their implications, and staying in charge of your actions. When a guy in a restaurant walks past a mother with an infant and the infant cries out, that's System 1. When the blushing mother says, No, dear, that's not Dada, that's a man. She is acting as a surrogate, System 2, helping the infant refine her System 1. System 1 is powerful because it draws on our accumulated years of experience and our deep emotions. System 1 gives us the survival reflex in moments of danger, and the astonishing deftness earned through thousands of hours of deliberate practice in a chosen field of expertise. In the interplay between Systems 1 and 2, the topic of Malcolm Gladwell's book Blink, your instantaneous ability to size up a situation plays against your capacity for skepticism and thoughtful analysis. Of course, when System 1's conclusions arise out of misperception or illusion, they can steer you into trouble. Knowing when to trust your intuition and when to question it is a big part of how you improve your competence in the world at large and in any field where you want to be expert. It's not just the dullards who fall victim. We all do, to varying degrees. Pilots, for example, are susceptible to a host of perceptual illusions. They are trained to beware of them and to use their instruments to know that they're getting things right. A frightening example, with a happy ending, is China Airlines Flight 006 on a winter day in 1985. The Boeing 747 was 41,000 feet above the Pacific, almost 10 hours into its 11-hour flight from Taipei to L.A., when Engine No. 4 lost power. The plane began to lose airspeed. Rather than taking manual control and descending below 30,000 feet to restart the engine as prescribed in the flight book, the crew held at 41,000 feet with the autopilot engaged and attempted a restart. Meanwhile, loss of the outboard engine gave the plane asymmetrical thrust. The autopilot tried to correct for this and keep the plane level, but as the plane continued to slow, it also began to roll to the right. The captain was aware of the deceleration, but not the extent to which the plane had entered a right bank. His System 1 clue would have been his vestibular reflex, how the inner ear senses balance and spatial orientation. But because of the plane's trajectory, he had the sensation of flying level. His System 2 clues would have been a glimpse at the horizon and his instruments. Correct procedure called for applying left rudder to help raise the right wing, but his System 2 focus was on the airspeed indicator and on the efforts of the first officer and engineer to restart the engine. As its bank increased, the plane descended through 37,000 feet into high clouds, which obscured the horizon. The captain switched off the autopilot and pushed the nose down to get more speed, but the plane had already rolled beyond 45 degrees and now turned upside down and fell into an uncontrolled descent. The crew were confused by the situation. They understood the plane was behaving erratically, but were unaware they had overturned and were in a dive. They could no longer discern thrust from engines 1 through 3 and concluded those engines had quit as well. The plane's dive was evident from their flight gauges, but the angle was so unlikely the crew decided the gauges had failed. At 11,000 feet, they broke through the clouds, astonished to see that they were roaring toward Earth. The captain and first officer both pulled back hard on the stick, exerting enormous forces on the plane, but managing to level off. Landing gear hung from the plane's belly, and they lost one of their hydraulic systems, but all four engines came to life, and the captain was able to fly on, diverting successfully to San Francisco. An inspection revealed just how severe their maneuver had been. Planes five times the force of gravity had bent the plane's wings permanently upward, broken two landing gear struts, and torn away two landing gear doors and large parts of the rear horizontal stabilizers. Spatial disorientation is the aeronautical term for a deadly combination of two elements, losing sight of the horizon and relying on human sensory perception that doesn't jibe with reality but is so convincing that pilots conclude their cockpit instruments have failed. As Kahneman says, System 1, the instinctual, reflexive system that detects danger and keeps us safe, can be very hard to overrule. Flight 006's initial incident, the loss of an engine cruising at altitude, is not considered an emergency, but it quickly became one as a result of the captain's actions. Rather than following prescribed procedure, and rather than fully engaging his System 2 analytic resources by monitoring all his instruments, he let himself become preoccupied with the engine restart and with a single flight indicator, airspeed. Then when things spiraled out of control, he trusted his senses over his gauges, in effect, trying to construct his own narrative of what was happening to the plane. There's a long list of allusions to which pilots can fall prey, some with mordant names like The Leans, Graveyard Spin, and The Black Hole Approach, and sites on the internet where you can listen to the chilling last words of pilots struggling and failing to understand and correct what's gone wrong in the sky. Spatial disorientation was deemed the probable cause of the crash that killed Mel Carnahan, the governor of Missouri, while being flown through a thunderstorm one night in October of 2000, and the probable cause of the crash that killed John F. Kennedy, Jr., and his wife and her sister off the shore of Martha's Vineyard on a hazy night in July of 1999. Fortunately, the China Airlines incident came to a good end, but the National Transportation Safety Board report of that incident reveals just how quickly training and professionalism can be hijacked by System 1 illusion, and therefore, why we need to cultivate a Discipline System 2, conscious analysis and reasoning, that always keeps one eye on the flight instruments. Illusions and Memory Distortions The filmmaker Errol Morris, in a series of articles on illusion in the New York Times, quotes the social psychologist David Dunning on humans' penchant for, quote, motivated reasoning, or as Dunning put it, the sheer genius people have at convincing themselves of congenial conclusions while denying the truth of inconvenient ones. The British Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli once said of a political opponent that his conscience was not his guide, but his accomplice. There are many ways that our System 1 and System 2 judgments can be led astray.